
Chapter 1 

In the comer of a firstclass smoking carriage, JusticeWargrave, lately retired 
from the bench, puffed at a cigar and ran an interested eye through the 

political news in the Times. 

He laid the paper down and glanced out of the window. They were running now 

through Somerset. He glanced at his watch another two hours to go. 

He went over in his mind all that had appeared in the papers about Indian 

Island. There had been its original purchase by an American millionaire who 
was 



crazy about yachting and an account of the luxurious modern house he had built 

on this little island off the Devon coast. The unfortunate fact that the new third 
wife of the American millionaire was a bad sailor had led to the subsequent 

putting up of the house and island for sale. Various glowing advertisements of it 

had appeared in the papers. Then came the first bald statement that it had been 

bought by a Mr. Owen. After that the rumours of the gossip writers had started. 

Indian Island had really been bought by Miss Gabrielle Turl, the Hollywood film 

star! She wanted to spend some months there free from all publicity! Busy Bee 

had hinted delicately that it was to be an abode for Royalty??! Mr. Merryweather 

had had it whispered to him that it had been bought for a honeymoon Young 

Lord L... had surrendered to Cupid at last! Jones knew for a fact that it had been 
purchased by the Admiralty with a view to carrying out some very hush hush 

experiments! 

Definitely, Indian Island was news! 

From his pocket JusticeWargrave drew out a letter. The handwriting was 

practically illegible but words here and there stood out with unexpected clarity. 

Dearest Lawrence... such years since I heard anything of you... must come to 

Indian Island... the most enchanting place... so much to talk over... old days... 

communion with Nature... bask in sunshine... 12:40 from Paddington... meet you 
at Oakbridge... and his correspondent signed herself with a flourish his ever 

Constance Culmington. 

JusticeWargrave cast back in his mind to remember when exactly he had 



last seen Lady Constance Culmington. It must be seven no, eight years ago. She 

had then been going to Italy to bask in the sun and be at one with Nature and 

the contadini. Later, he had heard, she had proceeded to Syria where she 
proposed to bask in yet stronger sun and live at one with Nature and the bedouin. 

Constance Culmington, he reflected to himself, was exactly the sort of woman 

who would buy an island and surround herself with mystery! Nodding his head 

in gentle approval of his logic, JusticeWargrave allowed his head to nod... 

He slept... 

II 

Vera Claythorne, in a thirdclass carriage with five other travellers in it, leaned 
her head back and shut her eyes. How hot it was travelling by train today! It 

would be nice to get to the sea! Really a great piece of luck getting this job. 
When you wanted a holiday post it nearly always meant looking after a swarm of 

children secretarial holiday posts were much more difficult to get. Even the 

agency hadn't held out much hope. 

And then the letter had come. 

I have received your name from the Skilled Women's Agency together with 
their recommendation. I understand they know you personally. I shall be glad to 

pay 

you the salary you ask and shall expect you to take up your duties on August 8th. 
The train is the 12:40 from Paddington and you will be met at Oakbridge station. 
I enclose five pound notes for expenses. 

Yours truly, 

Una Nancy Owen. 



And at the top was the stamped address Indian Island. Sticklehaven. Devon... 

Indian Island! Why, there had been nothing else in the papers lately! All sorts of 
hints and interesting rumours. Though probably that was mostly untrue. But the 

house had certainly been built by a millionaire and was said to be absolutely the 

last word in luxury. 

Vera Claythorne, tired by a recent strenuous term at school, thought to herself 

"Being a games mistress in a thirdclass school isn't much of a catch... If only I 
could get a job at some decent school." 

And then, with a cold feeling round her heart, she thought: "But I'm lucky to 
have even this. After all, people don't like a Coroner's Inquest, even if the 
Coroner did acquit me of all blame!" 

He had even complimented her on her presence of mind and courage, she 
remembered. For an inquest it couldn't have gone better. And Mrs. Hamilton had 

been kindness itself to her only Hugo (but she wouldn't think of Hugo!) 

Suddenly, in spite of the heat in the carriage she shivered and wished she wasn't 

going to the sea. A picture rose clearly before her mind. Cyril's head, bobbing up 
and down, swimming to the rock... Up and down up and down... And herself, 

swimming in easy practised strokes after him cleaving her way through the water 
but knowing, only too surely, that she wouldn't be in time... 

The sea its deep warm blue mornings spent lying out on the sands Hugo 

Hugo who had said he loved her... 

She must not think of Hugo... 

She opened her eyes and frowned across at the man opposite her. A tall man with 
a brown face, light eyes set rather close together and an arrogant almost cruel 



mouth. 


She thought to herself: 

"I bet he's been to some interesting parts of the world and seen some interesting 
things..." 

Ill 

Philip Lombard, summing up the girl opposite in a mere flash of his quick 
moving eyes thought to himself: 

"Quite attractive a bit schoolmistressy perhaps..." 

A cool customer, he should imagine and one who could hold her own in love or 
war. He'd rather like to take her on... 

He frowned. No, cut out all that kind of stuff. This was business. He'd got to 
keep his mind on the job. 

What exactly was up, he wondered? That little Jew had been damned 
mysterious. 

"Take it or leave it, Captain Lombard." 

He had said thoughtfully: 

"A hundred guineas, eh?" 

He had said it in a casual way as though a hundred guineas was nothing to him. 

A hundred guineas when he was literally down to his last square meal! He had 

fancied, though, that the little Jew had not been deceived that was the damnable 
part about Jews, you couldn't deceive them about money they knew! 

He had said in the same casual tone: 

"And you can't give me any further information?" 



Mr. Isaac Morris had shaken his little bald head very positively. 

"No, Captain Lombard, the matter rests there. It is understood by my client that 
your reputation is that of a good man in a tight place. I am empowered to hand 

you one hundred guineas in return for which you will travel to Sticklehaven, 

Devon. The nearest station is Oakbridge, you will be met there and motored to 

Sticklehaven where a motor launch will convey you to Indian Island. There you 

will hold yourself at the disposal of my client." 

Lombard had said abruptly: 

"For how long?" 

"Not longer than a week at most." 

Fingering his small moustache, Captain Lombard said: 

"You understand I can't undertake anything illegal?" 

He had darted a very sharp glance at the other as he had spoken. There had been 

a very faint smile on the thick Semitic lips of Mr. Morris as he answered gravely: 

"If anything illegal is proposed, you will, of course, be at perfect liberty to 
withdraw." 

Damn the smooth little brute, he had smiled! It was as though he knew very well 
that in Lombard's past actions legality had not always been a sine qua non... 
Lombard's own lips parted in a grin. 

By Jove, he'd sailed pretty near the wind once or twice! But he'd always got 
away 

with it! There wasn't much he drew the line at really... 



No, there wasn't much he'd draw the line at. He fancied that he was going to 
enjoy himself at Indian Island... 

IV 


In a nonsmoking carriage Miss Emily Brent sat very upright as was her custom. 
She was sixtyfive and she did not approve of lounging. Her father, a Colonel of 
the old school, had been particular about deportment. 

The present generation was shamelessly lax in their carriage, and in every 
other way... 

Enveloped in an aura of righteousness and unyielding principles, Miss Brent sat 
in her crowded thirdclass carriage and triumphed over its discomfort and its 

heat. Every one made such a fuss over things nowadays! They wanted injections 

before they had teeth pulled they took drugs if they couldn't sleep they wanted 
easy chairs and cushions and the girls allowed their figures to slop about anyhow 

and lay about half naked on the beaches in summer. 

Miss Brent's lips set closely. She would like to make an example of certain 
people. 

She remembered last year's summer holiday. This year, however, it would be 
quite different. Indian Island... 

Mentally she reread the letter which she had already read so many times. 

Dear Miss Brent, 

I do hope you remember me? We were together at Bellhaven Guest House in 
August some years ago, and we seemed to have so much in common. 



I am starting a guest house of my own on an island off the coast of Devon. I 
think there is really an opening for a place where there is good plain cooking and 
a nice oldfashioned type of person. None of this nudity and gramophones half 
the night. I shall be very glad if you could see your way to spending your 
summer 

holiday on Indian Island quite free as my guest. Would early in August suit 
you? Perhaps the 8th. 

Yours sincerely. 

U.N. 

What was the name? The signature was rather difficult to read. Emily Brent 

thought impatiently: "So many people write their signatures quite illegibly." 

She let her mind run back over the people at Bellhaven. She had been there two 

summers running. There had been that nice middleaged woman Mrs. Mrs. 

now what was her name? her father had been a Canon. And there had been a 

Miss Olton Ormen No, surely it was Oliver! Yes Oliver. 

Indian Island! There had been things in the paper about Indian Island 

something about a film star or was it an American millionaire? 

Of course often those places went very cheap islands didn't suit everybody. They 
thought the idea was romantic but when they came to live there they realized the 

disadvantages and were only too glad to sell. 

Emily Brent thought to herself: "I shall be getting a free holiday at any rate." 
With her income so much reduced and so many dividends not being paid, that 
was indeed something to take into consideration. If only she could remember a 



little more about Mrs. or was it Miss Oliver? 


V 

General Macarthur looked out of the carriage window. The train was just coming 

into Exeter where he had to change. Damnable, these slow branch line trains! 

This place, Indian Island, was really no distance at all as the crow flies. 

He hadn't got it clear who this fellow Owen was. A friend of Spoof Leggard's, 
apparently and of Johnny Dyer's. 

One or two of your old cronies are coming would like to have a talk over old 
times. 

Well, he'd enjoy a chat about old times. He'd had a fancy lately that fellows were 
rather lighting shy of him. All owing to that damned rumour! By God, it was 

pretty hard nearly thirty years ago now! DrArmstrong had talked, he supposed. 

Damned young pup! What did he know about it? Oh, well, no good brooding 
about 

these things! One fancied things sometimes fancied a fellow was looking at you 
queerly. 

This Indian Island now, he'd be interested to see it. A lot of gossip flying about. 
Looked as though there might be something in the rumour that the Admiralty or 
the War Office or the Air Force had got hold of it... 

Young Elmer Robson, the American millionaire, had actually built the place. 
Spent thousands on it, so it was said. Every mortal luxury... 

Exeter! And an hour to wait! And he didn't want to wait. He wanted to get on... 



VI 


 DrArmstrong was driving his Morris across Salisbury Plain. He was very 
tired... 

Success had its penalties. There had been a time when he had sat in his 
consulting room in Harley Street, correctly apparelled, surrounded with the most 

uptodate appliances and the most luxurious furnishings and waited waited 

through the empty days for his venture to succeed or fail... 

Well, it had succeeded! He'd been lucky! Lucky and skillful of course. He was a 
good man at his job but that wasn't enough for success. You had to have luck as 

well. And he'd had it! An accurate diagnosis, a couple of grateful women 
patients 

women with money and position and word had got about. "You ought to try 
DrArmstrong quite a young man but so clever Pam had been to all sorts of 
people for years and he put his finger on the trouble at once!" The ball had 
started rolling. 

And now  DrArmstrong had definitely arrived. His days were full. He had little 

leisure. And so, on this August morning, he was glad that he was leaving 
London 

and going to be for some days on an island off the Devon coast. Not that it was 

exactly a holiday. The letter he had received had been rather vague in its terms, 

but there was nothing vague about the accompanying cheque. A whacking fee. 

These Owens must be rolling in money. Some little difficulty, it seemed, a 
husband who was worried about his wife's health and wanted a report on it 

without her being alarmed. She wouldn't hear of seeing a doctor. Her nerves 



Nerves! The doctor's eyebrows went up. These women and their nerves! Well, it 
was good for business, after all. Half the women who consulted him had nothing 
the matter with them but boredom, but they wouldn't thank you for telling them 
so! And one could usually find something. 

"A slightly uncommon condition of the some long word nothing at all serious 
but it just needs putting right. A simple treatment." 

Well, medicine was mostly faithhealing when it came to it. And he had a good 
manner he could inspire hope and belief. 

Lucky that he'd managed to pull himself together in time after that business ten 

no, fifteen years ago. It had been a near thing, that! He'd been going to pieces. 

The shock had pulled him together. He'd cut out drink altogether. By Jove, it had 
been a near thing though... 

With a devastating carsplitting blast on the horn an enormous Super Sports 
Dalmain car rushed past him at eighty miles an hour.  DrArmstrong nearly went 
into the hedge. One of these young fools who tore round the country. He hated 
them. That had been a near shave, too. Damned young fool! 

VII 

Tony Marston, roaring down into Mere, thought to himself: 

"The amount of cars crawling about the roads is frightful. Always something 
blocking your way. And they will drive in the middle of the road! Pretty hopeless 
driving in England, anyway... Not like France where you really could let out..." 



Should he stop here for a drink, or push on? Heaps of time! Only another 
hundred miles and a bit to go. He'd have a gin and gingerbeer. Fizzing hot day! 

This island place ought to be rather good fun if the weather lasted. Who were 

these Owens, he wondered? Rich and stinking, probably. Badger was rather good 

at nosing people like that out. Of course, he had to, poor old chap, with no 
money of his own... 

Hope they'd do one well in drinks. Never knew with these fellows who'd made 
their money and weren't born to it. Pity that story about Gabrielle Turl having 
bought Indian Island wasn't true. He'd like to have been in with that film star 
crowd. 

Oh, well, he supposed there'd be a few girls there... 

Coming out of the Hotel, he stretched himself, yawned, looked up at the blue sky 
and climbed into the Dalmain. 

Several young women looked at him admiringly his six feet of wellproportioned 
body, his crisp hair, tanned face, and intensely blue eyes. 

He let in the clutch with a roar and leapt up the narrow street. Old men and 
errand boys jumped for safety. The latter looked after the car admiringly. 
Anthony Marston proceeded on his triumphal progress. 

VIII 

Mr. Blore was in the slow train from Plymouth. There was only one other person 
in his carriage, an elderly seafaring gentleman with a bleary eye. At the present 
moment he had dropped off to sleep. 



Mr. Blore was writing carefully in a little notebook. 

"That's the lot," he muttered to himself. "Emily Brent, Vera Claythorne,  
DrArmstrong, Anthony Marston, old JusticeWargrave, Philip Lombard, General 
Macarthur, C.M.G., D.S.O. Manservant and wife: Mr. and Mrs. Rogers." 

He closed the notebook and put it back in his pocket. He glanced over at the 
corner and the slumbering man. 

"Had one over the eight." diagnosed Mr. Blore accurately. He went over things 
carefully and conscientiously in his mind. 

"Job ought to be easy enough," he ruminated. "Don't see how I can slip up on it. 
Hope I look all right." 

He stood up and scrutinized himself anxiously in the glass. The face reflected 
there was of a slightly military cast with a moustache. There was very little 
expression in it. The eyes were grey and set rather close together. 

"Might be a Major," said Mr. Blore. "No, I forgot. There's that old military gent. 
He'd spot me at once. 

"South Africa," said Mr. Blore, "that's my line! None of these people have 
anything to do with South Africa, and I've just been reading that travel folder so 
I can talk about it all right." 

Fortunately there were all sorts and types of colonials. As a man of means from 

South Africa, Mr. Blore felt that he could enter into any society unchallenged. 

Indian Island. He remembered Indian Island as a boy... Smelly sort of rock 
covered with gulls stood about a mile from the coast. It had got its name from 

its resemblance to a man's head an American Indian profile. 



Funny idea to go and build a house on it! Awful in bad weather! But millionaires 
were full of whims! 

The old man in the corner woke up and said: 

"You can't never tell at sea never!" 

Mr. Blore said soothingly, "That's right. You can't." 

The old man hiccuped twice and said plaintively: 

"There's a squall coming." 

Mr. Blore said: 

"No, no, mate, it's a lovely day." 

The old man said angrily: 

"There's a squall ahead. I can smell it." 

"Maybe you're right," said Mr. Blore pacifically. 

The train stopped at a station and the old fellow rose unsteadily. 

"Thish where I get out." He fumbled with the window. Mr. Blore helped him. 
The old man stood in the doorway. He raised a solemn hand and blinked his 
bleary eyes. 

"Watch and pray," he said. "Watch and pray. The day of judgement is at hand." 
He collapsed through the doorway onto the platform. From a recumbent position 
he looked up at Mr. Blore and said with immense dignity: 

"I'm talking to you, young man. The day of judgement is very close at hand." 
Subsiding onto his seat Mr. Blore thought to himself: 



"He's nearer the day of judgement than I am!" 
But there, as it happens, he was wrong... 



Chapter 2 


Outside Oakbridge station a little group of people stood in momentary 
uncertainty. Behind them stood porters with suitcases. One of these called "Jim!" 

The driver of one of the taxis stepped forward. 

"You'm for Indian Island, maybe? he asked in a soft Devon voice. Four voices 
gave assent and then immediately afterwards gave quick surreptitious glances 
at each other. 

The driver said, addressing his remarks to JusticeWargrave as the senior 
member of the party: 

"There are two taxis here, sir. One of them must wait till the slow train from 
Exeter gets in a matter of five minutes there's one gentleman coming by that. 

Perhaps one of you wouldn't mind waiting? You'd be more comfortable that 
way." 

Vera Claythorne, her own secretarial position clear in her mind, spoke at once. 

"I'll wait," she said, "if you will go on?" She looked at the other three, her glance 
and voice had that slight suggestion of command in it that comes from having 

occupied a position of authority. She might have been directing which tennis sets 

the girls were to play in. 

Miss Brent said stiffly, "Thank you," bent her head and entered one of the taxis, 
the door of which the driver was holding open. 

JusticeWargrave followed her. 

Captain Lombard said: 



"I'll wait with Miss " 


"Claythorne," said Vera. 

"My name is Lombard, Philip Lombard." 

The porters were piling luggage on the taxi. Inside, Mr.  JusticeWargrave said 
with due legal caution: 

"Beautiful weather we are having." 

Miss Brent said: 

"Yes, indeed." 

A very distinguished old gentleman, she thought to herself. Quite unlike the 
usual type of man in seaside guest houses. Evidently Mrs. or Miss Oliver had 
good connections... 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave inquired: 

"Do you know this part of the world well?" 

"I have been to Cornwall and to Torquay, but this is my first visit to this part of 
Devon." 

The JusticeWargrave said: 

"I also am unacquainted with this part of the world." 

The taxi drove off. 

The driver of the second taxi said: 

"Like to sit inside while you're waiting?" 


Vera said decisively: 



"Not at all." 


Captain Lombard smiled. 

He said: 

"That sunny wall looks more attractive. Unless you'd rather go inside the 
station?" 

"No, indeed. It's so delightful to get out of that stuffy train." 

He answered: 

"Yes, travelling by train is rather trying in this weather." 

Vera said conventionally: 

"I do hope it lasts the weather, I mean. Our English summers are so treacherous." 
With a slight lack of originality Lombard asked: 

"Do you know this part of the world well?" 

"No, I've never been here before." She added quickly, conscientiously 
determined to make her position clear at once, "I haven't even seen my employer 
yet." 

"Your employer?" 

"Yes, I'm Mrs. Owen's secretary." 

"Oh, I see." Just imperceptibly his manner changed. It was slightly more assured 
easier in tone. He said: "Isn't that rather unusual?" 

Vera laughed. 

"Oh, no, I don't think so. Her own secretary was suddenly taken ill and she wired 
to an agency for a substitute and they sent me." 

"So that was it. And suppose you don't like the post when you've got there?" 



Vera laughed again. 

"Oh, it's only temporary a holiday post. I've got a permanent job at a girls' 

school. As a matter of fact I'm frightfully thrilled at the prospect of seeing Indian 
Island. There's been such a lot about it in the papers. Is it really very 
fascinating?" 

Lombard said: 

"I don't know. I haven't seen it." 

"Oh, really? The Owens are frightfully keen on it, I suppose. What are they like? 
Do tell me." 

Lombard thought: "Awkward, this am I supposed to have met them or not?" He 
said quickly: 

"There's a wasp crawling up your arm. No keep quite still." 

He made a convincing pounce. "There. It's gone!" 

"Oh, thank you. There are a lot of wasps about this summer." 

"Yes, I suppose it's the heat. Who are we waiting for, do you know?" 

"I haven't the least idea." 

The loud drawn out scream of an approaching train was heard. Lombard said: 
"That will be the train now." 

II 

It was a tall soldierly old man who appeared at the exit from the platform. His 

grey hair was clipped close and he had a neatly trimmed white moustache. 

His porter, staggering slightly under the weight of the solid leather suitcase, 
indicated Vera and Lombard. 



Vera came forward in a competent manner. She said: 

"I am Mrs. Owen's secretary. There is a car here waiting." She added: "This is 
Mr. Lombard." 

The faded blue eyes, shrewd in spite of their age, sized up Lombard. For a 
moment a judgement showed in them had there been any one to read it. 

"Goodlooking fellow. Something just a little wrong about him..." 

The three of them got into the waiting taxi. They drove through the sleepy streets 
of little Oakbridge and continued about a mile on the main Plymouth 

road. Then they plunged into a maze of cross country lanes, steep, green and 

narrow. 

General Macarthur said: 

"Don't know this part of Devon at all. My little place is in East Devon just on the 
borderline of Dorset." 

Vera said: 

"It really is lovely here. The hills and the red earth and everything so green and 
luscious looking." 

Philip Lombard said critically: 

"It's a bit shut in... I like open country myself. Where you can see what's 
coming..." 

General Macarthur said to him: 

"You've seen a bit of the world, I fancy?" 

Lombard shrugged his shoulders disparagingly. 

"I've knocked about here and there, sir." 

He thought to himself: "He'll ask me now if I was old enough to be in the War. 



These old boys always do." 

But General Macarthur did not mention the War. 

Ill 

They came up over a steep hill and down a zigzag track to Sticklehaven a mere 
cluster of cottages with a fishing boat or two drawn up on the beach. 

Illuminated by the setting sun, they had their first glimpse of Indian Island 
jutting up out of the sea to the south. 

Vera said, surprised: 

"It's a long way out." 

She had pictured it differently, close to shore, crowned with a beautiful white 

house. But there was no house visible, only the boldly silhouetted rock with its 

faint resemblance to a giant Indian's head. There was something sinister about it. 
She shivered faintly. 

Outside a little inn, the Seven Stars, three people were sitting. There was the 

hunched elderly figure of the JusticeWargrave, the upright form of Miss Brent, and a third 

man a big bluff man who came forward and introduced himself. 

"Thought we might as well wait for you," he said. "Make one trip of it. Allow 
me to introduce myself. Name's Davis. Natal, South Africa's my natal spot, ha, 
ha!" 

He laughed breezily. 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave looked at him with active malevolence. He seemed to be 
wishing that he could order the court to be cleared. Miss Emily Brent was clearly 



not sure if she liked colonials. 

"Any one care for a little nip before we embark?" asked Mr. Davis hospitably. 
Nobody assenting to this proposition, Mr. Davis turned and held up a finger. 
"Mustn't delay, then. Our good host and hostess will be expecting us," he said. 
He might have noticed that a curious constraint came over the other members of 
the party. It was as though the mention of their host and hostess had a curiously 
paralyzing effect upon the guests. 

In response to Davis' beckoning finger, a man detached himself from a nearby 

wall against which he was leaning and came up to them. His rolling gait 
proclaimed him a man of the sea. He had a weatherbeaten face and dark eyes 

with a slightly evasive expression. He spoke in his soft Devon voice. 

"Will you be ready to be starting for the island, ladies and gentlemen? The boat's 
waiting. There's two gentlemen coming by car, but Mr. Owen's orders was not to 

wait for them as they might arrive at any time." 

The party got up. Their guide led them along a small stone jetty. Alongside it a 
motor boat was lying. 

Emily Brent said: 

"That's a very small boat." 

The boat's owner said persuasively: 

"She's a fine boat, that, Ma'am. You could go to Plymouth in her as easy as 
winking." 


Mr.  JusticeWargrave said sharply: 



"There are a good many of us." 

"She'd take double the number, sir." 

Philip Lombard said in his pleasant easy voice: 

"It's quite all right. Glorious weather no swell." 

Rather doubtfully, Miss Brent permitted herself to be helped into the boat. The 

others followed suit. There was as yet no fraternizing among the party. It was as 

though each member of it was puzzled by the other members. 

They were just about to cast loose when their guide paused, boathook in hand. 

Down the steep track into the village a car was coming. A car so fantastically 
powerful, so superlatively beautiful that it had all the nature of an apparition. At 
the wheel sat a young man, his hair blown back by the wind. In the blaze of the 

evening light he looked, not a man, but a young God, a Hero God out of some 

Northern Saga. 

He touched the horn and a great roar of sound echoed from the rocks of the bay. 

It was a fantastic moment. In it, Anthony Marston seemed to be something more 

than mortal. Afterwards, more than one of those present remembered that 
moment. 

IV 

Fred Narracott sat by the engine thinking to himself that this was a queer lot. 

Not at all his idea of what Mr. Owen's guests were likely to be. He'd expected 
something altogether more classy. Togged up women and gentlemen in yachting 
costume and all very rich and important looking. 



Not at all like Mr. Elmer Robson's parties. A faint grin came to Fred Narracott's 
lips as he remembered the millionaire's guests. That had been a party if you like 
and the drink they'd got through! 

This Mr. Owen must be a very different sort of gentleman. Funny it was, thought 
Fred, that he'd never yet set eyes on Owen or his Missus either. Never been 
down here yet, he hadn't. Everything ordered and paid for by that Mr. Morris. 
Instructions always very clear and payment prompt, but it was odd, all the same. 
The papers said there was some mystery about Owen. Mr. Narracott agreed with 
them. 

Perhaps, after all, it was Miss Gabrielle Turl who had bought the island. But that 
theory departed from him as he surveyed his passengers. Not this lot none 

of them looked likely to have anything to do with a film star. 

He summed them up dispassionately. 

One old maid the sour kind he knew them well enough. She was a Tartar, he 
could bet. Old military gentleman real Army by the look of him. Nice looking 
young lady but the ordinary kind, not glamourous no Hollywood touch about 
her. That bluff cheery gent he wasn't a real gentleman. Retired tradesman, 
that's what he is, thought Fred Narracott. The other gentleman, the lean hungry 
looking gentleman with the quick eyes, he was a queer one, he was. Just possible 
he might have something to do with the pictures. 

No, there was only one satisfactory passenger in the boat. The last gentleman, 



the one who had arrived in the car (and what a car! A car such as had never been 
seen in Sticklehaven before. Must have cost hundreds and hundreds, a car like 
that). 

He was the right kind. Born to money, he was. If the party had been all like 
him... he'd understand it... 

Queer business when you came to think of it the whole thing was queer very 
queer... 

V 

The boat churned its way round the rock. Now at last the house came into view. 

The south side of the island was quite different It shelved gently down to the sea. 

The house was there facing south low and square and modernlooking with 
rounded windows letting in all the light. 

An exciting house a house that lived up to expectation! 

Fred Narracott shut off the engine, they nosed their way gently into a little 

natural inlet between rocks. 

Philip Lombard said sharply: 

"Must be difficult to land here in dirty weather." 

Fred Narracott said cheerfully: 

"Can't land on Indian Island when there's a southeasterly. Sometimes 'tis cut off 
for a week or more." 

Vera Claythorne thought: 

"The catering must be very difficult. That's the worst of an island. All the 



domestic problems are so worrying." 

The boat grated against the rocks. Fred Narracott jumped out and he and 
Lombard helped the others to alight. Narracott made the boat fast to a ring in 

the rock. Then he led the way up steps cut in the rock. 

General Macarthur said: 

"Ha, delightful spot!" 

But he felt uneasy. Damned odd sort of place. 

As the party ascended the steps, and came out on a terrace above, their spirits 
revived. In the open doorway of the house a correct butler was awaiting them, 

and something about his gravity reassured them. And then the house itself was 

really most attractive, the view from the terrace magnificent... 

The butler came forward bowing slightly. He was a tall lank man, greyhaired 

and very respectable. He said: 

"Will you come this way, please?" 

In the wide hall drinks stood ready. Rows of bottles. Anthony Marston's spirits 
cheered up a little. He'd just been thinking this was a rum kind of show. None of 
his lot! What could old Badger have been thinking about to let him in for this? 
However the drinks were all right. Plenty of ice, too. 

What was it the butler chap was saying? 

"Mr. Owen unfortunately delayed unable to get here till tomorrow. 

Instructions everything they wanted if they would like to go to their rooms?... 


dinner would be at 8 o'clock..." 



VI 


Vera had followed Mrs. Rogers upstairs. The woman had thrown open a door at 
the end of a passage and Vera had walked into a delightful bedroom with a big 
window that opened wide upon the sea and another looking east. She uttered a 
quick exclamation of pleasure. 

Mrs. Rogers was saying: 

"I hope you've got everything you want, Miss?" 

Vera looked round. Her luggage had been brought up and had been unpacked. At 
one side of the room a door stood open into a pale blue tiled bathroom. 

She said quickly: 

"Yes, everything, I think." 

"You'll ring the bell if you want anything, Miss?" 

Mrs. Rogers had a flat monotonous voice. Vera looked at her curiously. What a 

white bloodless ghost of a woman! Very respectable looking, with her hair 
dragged back from her face and her black dress. Queer light eyes that shifted the 

whole time from place to place. 

Vera thought: 

"She looks frightened of her own shadow." 

Yes, that was it frightened! 

She looked like a woman who walked in mortal fear... 

A little shiver passed down Vera's back. What on earth was the woman afraid of? 



She said pleasantly: 

"I'm Mrs. Owen's new secretary. I expect you know that." 

Mrs. Rogers said: 

"No, Miss, I don't know anything. Just a list of the ladies and gentlemen and 
what rooms they were to have." 

Vera said: 

"Mrs. Owen didn't mention me?" 

Mrs. Rogers' eyelashes flickered. 

"I haven't seen Mrs. Owen not yet. We only came here two days ago." 
"Extraordinary people, these Owens," thought Vera. Aloud she said: 

"What staff is there here?" 

"Just me and Rogers, Miss." 

Vera frowned. Eight people in the house ten with the host and hostess and 
only one married couple to do for them. 

Mrs. Rogers said: 

"I'm a good cook and Rogers is handy about the house. I didn't know, of course, 
that there was to be such a large party." 

Vera said: 

"But you can manage?" 

"Oh, yes, Miss, I can manage. If there's to be large parties often perhaps Mrs. 
Owen could get extra help in." 

Vera said, "I expect so." 



Mrs. Rogers turned to go. Her feet moved noiselessly over the ground. She 
drifted 

from the room like a shadow. 

Vera went over to the window and sat down on the window seat. She was faintly 
disturbed. Everything somehow was a little queer. The absence of the Owens, 
the pale ghostlike Mrs. Rogers. And the guests! Yes, the guests were queer too. 
An oddly assorted party. 

Vera thought: 

"I wish I'd seen the Owens... I wish I knew what they were like." 

She got up and walked restlessly about the room. 

A perfect bedroom decorated throughout in the modern style. Offwhite rugs on 
the gleaming parquet floor faintly tinted walls a long mirror surrounded by 
lights. A mantelpiece bare of ornaments save for an enormous block of white 
marble shaped like a bear, a piece of modern sculpture in which was inset a 
clock. Over it, in a gleaming chromium frame, was a big square of parchment a 
poem. 

She stood in front of the fireplace and read it. It was the old nursery rhyme that 
she remembered from her childhood days. 

Ten little Indian boys went out to dine; 

One choked his little self and then there were nine. 

Nine little Indian boys sat up very late; 

One overslept himself and then there were eight. 



Eight little Indian boys travelling in Devon; 

One said he'd stay there and then there were seven. 

Seven little Indian boys chopping up sticks; 

One chopped himself in halves and then there were six. 

Six little Indian boys playing with a hive; 

A bumblebee stung one and then there were five. 

Five little Indian boys going in for law; 

One got in Chancery and then there were four. 

Four little Indian boys going out to sea; 

A red herring swallowed one and then there were three. 

Three little Indian boys walking in the Zoo; 

A big bear hugged one and then there were two. 

Two little Indian boys sitting in the sun; 

One got frizzled up and then there was one. 

One little Indian boy left all alone; 

He went and hanged himself and then there were none. 

Vera smiled. Of course! This was Indian Island! 

She went and sat again by the window looking out to sea. 

How big the sea was! From here there was no land to be seen anywhere just a 
vast expanse of blue water rippling in the evening sun. 

The sea... So peaceful today sometimes so cruel... The sea that dragged you 



down to its depths. Drowned... Found drowned... Drowned at sea... Drowned 
drowned drowned... 

No, she wouldn't remember... She would not think of it! 

All that was over... 

VII 

 DrArmstrong came to Indian Island just as the sun was sinking into the sea. On 

the way across he had chatted to the boatman a local man. He was anxious to 

find out a little about these people who owned Indian Island, but the man 
Narracott seemed curiously ill informed, or perhaps unwilling to talk. 

So  DrArmstrong chatted instead of the weather and of fishing. 

He was tired after his long motor drive. His eyeballs ached. Driving west you 

were driving against the sun. 

Yes, he was very tired. The sea and perfect peace that was what he needed. He 

would like, really, to take a long holiday. But he couldn't afford to do that. He 

could afford it financially, of course, but he couldn't afford to drop out. You were 
soon forgotten nowadays. No, now that he had arrived, he must keep his nose to 

the grindstone. 

He thought: 

"All the same, this evening, I'll imagine to myself that I'm not going back that 
I've done with London and Harley Street and all the rest of it." 

There was something magical about an island the mere word suggested fantasy. 

You lost touch with the world an island was a world of its own. A world, 



perhaps, from which you might never return. 

He thought: 

"I'm leaving my ordinary life behind me." 

And, smiling to himself, he began to make plans, fantastic plans for the future. 
He was still smiling when he walked up the rock cut steps. 

In a chair on the terrace an old gentleman was sitting and the sight of him was 
vaguely familiar to  DrArmstrong. Where had he seen that froglike face, that 
tortoiselike neck, that hunched up attitude yes, and those pale shrewd little 
eyes? Of course old JusticeWargrave. He'd given evidence once before him. Always 
looked half asleep, but was shrewd as could be when it came to a point of law. 
Had great power with a jury it was said he could make their minds up for them 
any day of the week. He'd got one or two unlikely convictions out of them. A 
hanging JusticeWargrave, some people said. 

Funny place to meet him... here out of the world. 

VIII 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave thought to himself: 

"DrArmstrong? Remember him in the witness box. Very correct and cautious. All 

doctors are damned fools. Harley Street ones are the worst of the lot." And his 
mind dwelt malevolently on a recent interview he had had with a suave 
personage in that very street. 

Aloud he grunted: 


"Drinks are in the hall." 



 DrArmstrong said: 

"I must go and pay my respects to my host and hostess." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave closed his eyes again, looking decidedly reptilian, and said: 
"You can't do that." 

 DrArmstrong was startled. 

"Why not?" 

The JusticeWargrave said: 

"No host and hostess. Very curious state of affairs. Don't understand this place." 
 DrArmstrong stared at him for a minute. When he thought the old gentleman 
had actually gone to sleep, JusticeWargrave said suddenly: 

"D'you know Constance Culmington?" 

"Er no, I'm afraid I don't." 

"It's of no consequence," said the JusticeWargrave. "Very vague woman and practically 
unreadable handwriting. I was just wondering if I'd come to the wrong house." 

 DrArmstrong shook his head and went on up to the house. 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave reflected on the subject of Constance Culmington. 

Undependable like all women. 

His mind went on to the two women in the house, the tightlipped old maid and 

the girl. He didn't care for the girl, coldblooded young hussy. No, three women, 
if you counted the Rogers woman. Odd creature, she looked scared to death. 

Respectable pair and knew their job... 

Rogers coming out on the terrace that minute, the JusticeWargrave asked him: 



"Is Lady Constance Culmington expected, do you know?" 

Rogers stared at him. 

"No, sir, not to my knowledge." 

The JusticeWargrave's eyebrows rose. But he only grunted. 

He thought: 

"Indian Island, eh? There's a nigger in the woodpile." 

IX 

Anthony Marston was in his bath. He luxuriated in the steaming water. His 
limbs had felt cramped after his long drive. Very few thoughts passed through 
his head. Anthony was a creature of sensation and of action. 

He thought to himself: 

"Must go through with it, I suppose," and thereafter dismissed everything from 
his mind. 

Warm steaming water tired limbs presently a shave a cocktail dinner. 

And after ? 

X 

Mr. Blore was tying his tie. He wasn't very good at this sort of thing. 

Did he look all right? He supposed so. 

Nobody had been exactly cordial to him... Funny the way they all eyed each 
other 

as though they knew... 

Well, it was up to him. He didn't mean to bungle his job. 



He glanced up at the framed nursery rhyme over the mantelpiece. 

Neat touch, having that there! 

He thought: 

"Remember this island when I was a kid. Never thought I'd be doing this sort of 
a job in a house here. Good thing, perhaps, that one can't foresee the future..." 

XI 

General Macarthur was frowning to himself. Damn it all, the whole thing was 
deuced odd! Not at all what he'd been led to expect... 

For two pins he'd make an excuse and get away... Throw up the whole business... 
But the motor boat had gone back to the mainland. 

He'd have to stay. 

That fellow Lombard now, he was a queer chap. 

Not straight. He'd swear the man wasn't straight. 

XII 

As the gong sounded, Philip Lombard came out of his room and walked to the 
head of the stairs. He moved like a panther, smoothly and noiselessly. There was 
something of the panther about him altogether. A beast of prey pleasant to the 
eye. 

He was smiling to himself. 

A week eh? 

He was going to enjoy that week. 


XIII 



In her bedroom, Emily Brent, dressed in black silk ready for dinner, was reading 
her Bible. 

Her lips moved as she followed the words: 

"The heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made: in the net which they hid 
is their own foot taken. The Lord is known by the judgement which he 
executeth: 

the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. The wicked shall be turned 
into hell." 

Her tight lips closed. She shut the Bible. 

Rising, she pinned a cairngorm brooch at her neck, and went down to dinner. 



Chapter 3 

Dinner was drawing to a close. 

The food had been good, the wine perfect. Rogers waited well. 

Every one was in better spirits. They had begun to talk to each other with more 
freedom and intimacy. 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave, mellowed by the excellent port, was being amusing in a 

caustic fashion;  DrArmstrong and Tony Marston were listening to him. Miss 

Brent chatted to General Macarthur; they had discovered some mutual friends. 

Vera Claythorne was asking Mr. Davis intelligent questions about South Africa. 

Mr. Davis was quite fluent on the subject. Lombard listened to the conversation. 

Once or twice he looked up quickly, and his eyes narrowed. Now and then his 
eyes played round the table, studying the others. 

Anthony Marston said suddenly: 

"Quaint, these things, aren't they?" 

In the centre of the round table, on a circular glass stand, were some little china 
figures. 

"Indians." said Tony. "Indian Island. I suppose that's the idea." 

Vera leaned forward. 

"I wonder. How many are there? Ten?" 

"Yes ten there are." 


Vera cried: 



"What fun! They're the ten little Indian boys of the nursery rhyme, I suppose. In 
my bedroom the rhyme is framed and hung up over the mantelpiece." 

Lombard said: 

"In my room, too." 

"And mine." 

"And mine." 

Everybody joined the chorus. Vera said: 

"It's an amusing idea, isn't it?" 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave grunted: 

"Remarkably childish," and helped himself to port. 

Emily Brent looked at Vera Claythorne. Vera Claythorne looked at Miss Brent. 
The two women rose. 

In the drawingroom, the French windows were open onto the terrace and the 
sound of the sea murmuring against the rocks came up to them. 

Emily Brent said: "Pleasant sound." 

Vera said sharply: "I hate it." 

Miss Brent's eyes looked at her in surprise. Vera flushed. She said, more 
composedly: 

"I don't think this place would be very agreeable in a storm." 

Emily Brent agreed. 

"I've no doubt the house is shut up in winter," she said. "You'd never get servants 
to stay here for one thing." 



Vera murmured: 


"It must be difficult to get servants anyway." 

Emily Brent said: 

"Mrs. Oliver has been lucky to get these two. The woman's a good cook." 

Vera thought: 

"Funny how elderly people always get names wrong." 

She said: 

"Yes, I think Mrs. Owen has been very lucky indeed." 

Emily Brent had brought a small piece of embroidery out of her bag. Now, as she 
was about to thread her needle, she paused. 

She said sharply: 

"Owen? Did you say Owen?" 

"Yes." 

Emily Brent said sharply: 

"I've never met any one called Owen in my life." 

Vera stared. 

"But surely" 

She did not finish her sentence. The door opened and the men joined them. 
Rogers followed them into the room with the coffee tray. 

The JusticeWargrave came and sat down by Emily Brent. DrArmstrong came up to Vera. Tony 
Marston strolled to the open window. Blore studied with nanve surprise a 



statuette in brass wondering perhaps if its bizarre angularities were really 
supposed to be the female figure. General Macarthur stood with his back to the 
mantelpiece. He pulled at his little white moustache. That had been a damned 
good dinner! His spirits were rising. Lombard turned over the pages of Punch 
that lay with other papers on a table by the wall. 

Rogers went round with the coffee tray. The coffee was good really black and 
very hot. 

The whole party had dined well. They were satisfied with themselves and with 
life. The hands of the clock pointed to twenty minutes past nine. There was a 
silence a comfortable replete silence. 

Into that silence came The Voice. Without warning, inhuman, penetrating... 
"Ladies and gentlemen! Silence, please!" 

Every one was startled. They looked round at each other, at the walls. Who was 
speaking? 

The Voice went on a high clear voice. 

You are charged with the following indictments: 

Edward George DrArmstrong, that you did upon the 14th day of March, 1925, 
cause the death of Louisa Mary Clees. 

Emily Caroline Brent, that upon the 5th November, 1931, you were responsible 
for the death of Beatrice Taylor. 

William Henry Blore, that you brought about the death of James Stephen Landor 



on October 10th, 1928. 

Vera Elizabeth Claythorne, that on the 11th day of August, 1935, you killed 
Cyril 

Ogilvie Hamilton. 

Philip Lombard, that upon a date in February, 1932, you were guilty of the death 
of twentyone men, members of an East African tribe. 

John Gordon Macarthur, that on the 4th of January, 1917, you deliberately sent 
your wife's lover, Arthur Richmond, to his death. 

Anthony James Marston, that upon the 14th day of November last, you were 
guilty of the murder of John and Lucy Combes. 

Thomas Rogers and Ethel Rogers, that on the 6th of May, 1929, you brought 
about the death of Jennifer Brady. 

Lawrence John JusticeWargrave, that upon the 10th day of June, 1930, you were guilty 
of the murder of Edward Seton. 

Prisoners at the bar, have you anything to say in your defence? 

II 

The Voice had stopped. 

There was a moment's petrified silence and then a resounding crash! Rogers had 
dropped the coffee tray! 

At the same moment, from somewhere outside the room there came a scream 
and 


the sound of a thud. 



Lombard was the first to move. He leapt to the door and flung it open. Outside, 
lying in a huddled mass, was Mrs. Rogers. 

Lombard called: 

"Marston." 

Anthony sprang to help him. Between them, they lifted up the woman and 
carried her into the drawingroom. 

 DrArmstrong came across quickly. He helped them to lift her onto the sofa and 
bent over her. He said quickly: 

"It's nothing. She's fainted, that's all. She'll be round in a minute." 

Lombard said to Rogers: 

"Get some brandy." 

Rogers, his face white, his hands shaking, murmured: 

"Yes, sir," and slipped quickly out of the room. 

Vera cried out: 

"Who was that speaking? Where was he? It sounded it sounded " 

General Macarthur spluttered out: 

"What's going on here? What kind of a practical joke was that?" 

His hand was shaking. His shoulders sagged. He looked suddenly ten years 
older. 

Blore was mopping his face with a handkerchief. 

Only Mr.  JusticeWargrave and Miss Brent seemed comparatively unmoved. 
Emily Brent sat upright, her head held high. In both cheeks was a spot of hard 



colour. The JusticeWargrave sat in his habitual pose, his head sunk down into his neck. 

With one hand he gently scratched his ear. Only his eyes were active, darting 

round and round the room, puzzled, alert with intelligence. 

Again it was Lombard who acted. DrArmstrong being busy with the collapsed 
woman, Lombard was free once more to take the initiative. 

He said: 

"That voice? It sounded as though it were in the room." 

Vera cried: 

"Who was it? Who was it? It wasn't one of us." 

Like the JusticeWargrave, Lombard's eyes wandered slowly round the room. They rested a 
minute on the open window, then he shook his head decisively. Suddenly his 
eyes 

lighted up. He moved forward swiftly to where a door near the fireplace led into 
an adjoining room. 

With a swift gesture, he caught the handle and flung the door open. He passed 
through and immediately uttered an exclamation of satisfaction. 

He said: 

"Ah, here we are." 

The others crowded after him. Only Miss Brent remained alone sitting erect in 
her chair. 

Inside the second room a table had been brought up close to the wall which 
adjoined the drawingroom. On the table was a gramophone an oldfashioned 



type with a large trumpet attached. The mouth of the trumpet was against the 
wall, and Lombard, pushing it aside, indicated where two or three small holes 
had been unobtrusively bored through the wall. 

Adjusting the gramophone he replaced the needle on the record and immediately 
they heard again: "You are charged with the following indictments " 

Vera cried: 

"Turn it off! Turn it off! It's horrible!" 

Lombard obeyed. 

 DrArmstrong said, with a sigh of relief: 

"A disgraceful and heartless practical joke, I suppose." 

The small clear voice of Mr.  JusticeWargrave murmured: 

"So you think it's a joke, do you?" 

The doctor stared at him. 

"What else could it be?" 

The hand of the JusticeWargrave gently stroked his upper lip. 

He said: 

"At the moment I'm not prepared to give an opinion." 

Anthony Marston broke in. He said: 

"Look here, there's one thing you've forgotten. Who the devil turned the thing on 
and set it going?" 


JusticeWargrave murmured: 



"Yes, I think we must inquire into that." 

He led the way back into the drawingroom. The others followed. 

Rogers had just come in with a glass of brandy. Miss Brent was bending over the 
moaning form of Mrs. Rogers. 

Adroitly Rogers slipped between the two women. 

"Allow me, Madam, I'll speak to her. Ethel Ethel it's all right. All right, do you 
hear? Pull yourself together." 

Mrs. Rogers' breath came in quick gasps. Her eyes, staring frightened eyes, went 
round and round the ring of faces. There was urgency in Rogers' tone. 

"Pull yourself together, Ethel." 

 DrArmstrong spoke to her soothingly. 

"You'll be all right now, Mrs. Rogers. Just a nasty turn." 

She said: 

"Did I faint, sir?" 

"Yes." 

"It was The Voice that awful voice like a judgement " 

Her face turned green again, her eyelids fluttered. 

 DrArmstrong said sharply: 

"Where's that brandy?" 

Rogers had put it down on a little table. Some one handed it to the doctor and he 
bent over the gasping woman with it. 



"Drink this, Mrs. Rogers." 

She drank, choking a little and gasping. The spirit did her good. The colour 
returned to her face. She said: 

"I'm all right now. It just gave me a turn." 

Rogers said quickly: 

"Of course it did. It gave me a turn too. Fair made me drop that tray. Wicked lies, 
it was! I'd like to know " 

He was interrupted. It was only a cough a dry little cough but it had the effect of 
stopping him in full cry. He stared at Mr.  JusticeWargrave and the latter 

coughed again. Then he said: 

"Who put that record on the gramophone? Was it you, Rogers?" 

Rogers cried: 

"I didn't know what it was. Before God, I didn't know what it was, sir. If I had I'd 
never have done it." 

The JusticeWargrave said drily: 

"That is probably true. But I think you'd better explain, Rogers." 

The butler wiped his face with a handkerchief. He said earnestly: 

"I was just obeying orders, sir, that's all." 

"Whose orders?" 

"Mr. Owen's." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave said: 

"Let me get this quite clear. Mr. Owen's orders were what exactly?" 



Rogers said: 

"I was to put a record on the gramophone. I'd find the record in the drawer and 
my wife was to start the gramophone when I'd gone into the drawingroom with 

the coffee tray." 

The JusticeWargrave murmured: 

"Avery remarkable story." 

Rogers cried: 

"It's the truth, sir. I swear to God it's the truth. I didn't know what it was not for 
moment. It had a name on it I thought it was just a piece of music." 

JusticeWargrave looked at Lombard. 

"Was there a title on it?" 

Lombard nodded. He grinned suddenly, showing his white pointed teeth. 

He said: 

"Quite right, sir. It was entitled Swan Song..." 

Ill 

General Macarthur broke out suddenly. He exclaimed: 

"The whole thing is preposterous preposterous! Slinging accusations about like 
this! Something must be done about it. This fellow Owen whoever he is " 

Emily Brent interrupted. She said sharply: 

"That's just it, who is he?" 

The JusticeWargrave interposed. He spoke with the authority that a lifetime in the courts 
had given him. He said: 



"That is exactly what we must go into very carefully. I should suggest that you 
get your wife to bed first of all, Rogers. Then come back here." 

"Yes, sir." 

 DrArmstrong said: 

"I'll give you a hand, Rogers." 

Leaning on the two men, Mrs. Rogers tottered out of the room. When they had 
gone Tony Marston said: 

"Don't know about you, sir, but I could do with a drink." 

Lombard said: 

"I agree." 

Tony said: 

"I'll go and forage." 

He went out of the room. 

He returned a second or two later. 

"Found them all waiting on a tray outside ready to be brought in." 

He set down his burden carefully. The next minute or two was spent in 
dispensing drinks. General Macarthur had a stiff whiskey and so did the JusticeWargrave. 

Every one felt the need of a stimulant. Only Emily Brent demanded and obtained 

a glass of water. 

 DrArmstrong reentered the room. 

"She's all right," he said. "I've given her a sedative to take. What's that, a drink? I 
could do with one." 



Several of the men refilled their glasses. A moment or two later Rogers reentered 
the room. 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave took charge of the proceedings. The room became an 
impromptu court of law. 

The JusticeWargrave said: 

"Now then, Rogers, we must get to the bottom of this. Who is this Mr. Owen?" 
Rogers stared. 

"He owns this place, sir." 

"I am aware of that fact. What I want you to tell me is what you yourself know 
about the man." 

Rogers shook his head. 

"I can't say, sir. You see, I've never seen him." 

There was a faint stir in the room. 

General Macarthur said: 

"You've never seen him? What d'yer mean?" 

"We've only been here just under a week, sir, my wife and I. We were engaged 
by letter, through an agency. The Regina Agency in Plymouth." 

Blore nodded. 

"Old established firm," he volunteered. 

JusticeWargrave said: 

"Have you got that letter?" 

"The letter engaging us? No, sir. I didn't keep it." 

"Go on with your story. You were engaged, as you say, by letter." 



"Yes, sir. We were to arrive on a certain day. We did. Everything was in order 
here. Plenty of food in stock and everything very nice. Just needed dusting and 

that." 

"What next?" 

"Nothing, sir. We got orders by letter again to prepare the rooms for a houseparty 
and then yesterday by the afternoon post I got another letter from 

Mr. Owen. It said he and Mrs. Owen were detained and to do the best we could 

and it gave the instructions about dinner and coffee and putting on the 
gramophone record." 

The JusticeWargrave said sharply: 

"Surely you've got that letter?" 

"Yes, sir, I've got it here." 

He produced it from a pocket. The JusticeWargrave took it. 

"H'm," he said. "Headed Ritz Hotel and typewritten." 

With a quick movement Blore was beside him. 

He said: 

"If you'll just let me have a look." 

He twitched it out of the other's hand, and ran his eye over it. 

He murmured: 

"Coronation machine. Quite new no defects. Ensign paper the most widely 
used make. You won't get anything out of that. Might be fingerprints, but I doubt 


it." 



JusticeWargrave stared at him with sudden attention. 

Anthony Marston was standing beside Blore looking over his shoulder. He said: 

"Got some fancy Christian names, hasn't he? Ulick Norman Owen. Quite a 
mouthful." 

"The old JusticeWargrave said with a slight start: 

"I am obliged to you, Mr. Marston. You have drawn my attention to a curious 
and suggestive point." 

He looked round at the others and thrusting his neck forward like an angry 
tortoise, he said: 

"I think the time has come for us all to pool our information. It would be well, I 
think, for everybody to come forward with all the information they have 
regarding the owner of this house." He paused and then went on. "We are all his 
guests. I think it would be profitable if each one of us were to explain exactly 
how that came about." 

There was a moment's pause and then Emily Brent spoke with decision. 

"There's something very peculiar about all this," she said. "I received a letter 
with a signature that was not very easy to read. It purported to be from a woman 

I had met at a certain summer resort two or three years ago. I took the name to 

be either Ogden or Oliver. I am acquainted with a Mrs. Oliver and also with a 

Miss Ogden. I am quite certain that I have never met, or become friendly with, 

any one of the name of Owen." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave said: 

"You have that letter, Miss Brent?" 

"Yes, I will fetch it for you." 



She went away and returned a minute later with the letter. 

The JusticeWargrave read it. He said: 

"I begin to understand... Miss Claythorne?" 

Vera explained the circumstances of her secretarial engagement. 

The JusticeWargrave said: 

"Marston?" 

Anthony said: 

"Got a wire. From a pal of mine. Badger Berkeley. Surprised me at the time 

because I had an idea the old horse had gone to Norway. Told me to roll up 
here." 

Again JusticeWargrave nodded. He said: 

" DrArmstrong?" 

"I was called in professionally." 

"I see. You had no previous acquaintanceship with the family?" 

"No. A colleague of mine was mentioned in the letter." 

The JusticeWargrave said: 

"To give verisimilitude... Yes, and that colleague, I presume, was momentarily 
out of touch with you?" 

"Well er yes." 

Lombard, who had been staring at Blore, said suddenly: 

"Look here, I've just thought of something " 


The JusticeWargrave lifted a hand. 



"In a minute " 


"But I " 

"We will take one thing at a time, Mr. Lombard. We are at present inquiring into 
the causes which have resulted in our being assembled here tonight. General 

Macarthur?" 

Pulling at his moustache, the General muttered: 

"Got a letter from this fellow Owen mentioned some old pals of mine who were 
to be here hoped I'd excuse informal invitation. Haven't kept the letter. I'm 

afraid." 

JusticeWargrave said: 

"Mr. Lombard?" 

Lombard's brain had been active. Was he to come out in the open, or not? He 
made up his mind. 

"Same sort of thing," he said. "Invitation, mention of mutual friends I fell for it 
all right. I've torn up the letter." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave turned his attention to Mr. Blore. His forefinger stroked 
his upper lip and his voice was dangerously polite. 

He said: "Just now we had a somewhat disturbing experience. An apparently 
disembodied voice spoke to us all by name, uttering certain precise accusations 
against us. We will deal with those accusations presently. At the moment I am 
interested in a minor point Amongst the names recited was that of William 


Henry Blore. But as far as we know there is no one named Blore amongst us. 
The 



name of Davis was not mentioned. What have you to say about that, Mr. Davis?" 
Blore said sulkily: 

"Cat's out of the bag, it seems. I suppose I'd better admit that my name isn't 
Davis." 

"You are William Henry Blore?" 

"That's right." 

"I will add something," said Lombard. "Not only are you here under a false 
name, Mr. Blore, but in addition I've noticed this evening that you're a firstclass 
liar. 

You claim to have come from Natal, South Africa. I know South Africa and 
Natal 

and I'm prepared to swear that you've never set foot in South Africa in your life." 

All eyes were turned on Blore. Angry suspicious eyes. Anthony Marston moved 
a 

step nearer to him. His fists clenched themselves. 

"Now then, you swine," he said. "Any explanation?" 

Blore flung back his head and set his square jaw. 

"You gentlemen have got me wrong," he said. "I've got my credentials and you 
can see them. I'm an exC.I.D. man. I run a detective agency in Plymouth. I was 

put on this job." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave asked: "By whom?" 

"This man Owen. Enclosed a handsome money order for expenses and instructed 
me as to what he wanted done. I was to join the house party, posing as a guest. I 
was given all your names. I was to watch you all." 



"Any reason given?" 

Blore said bitterly: 

"Mrs. Owen's jewels. Mrs. Owen my foot! I don't believe there's any such 
person." 

Again the forefinger of the JusticeWargrave stroked his lip, this time appreciatively. 

"Your conclusions are, I think, justified," he said. "Ulick Norman Owen! In Miss 
Brent's letter, though the signature of the surname is a mere scrawl the Christian 
names are reasonably clear Una Nancy in either case, you notice, 

the same initials. Ulick Norman Owen Una Nancy Owen each time, that is to 

say, U.N. Owen. Or by a slight stretch of fancy, UNKNOWN!" 

Vera cried: 

"But this is fantastic mad!" 

The JusticeWargrave nodded gently. 

He said: 

"Oh, yes. I've no doubt in my own mind that we have been invited here by a 
madman probably a dangerous homicidal lunatic." 



Chapter 4 

There was a moment's silence a silence of dismay and bewilderment. Then the 
JusticeWargrave's small clear voice took up the thread once more. 


"We will now proceed to the next stage of our inquiry. First, however, I will just 
add my own credentials to the list." 

He took a letter from his pocket and tossed it onto the table. 

"This purports to be from an old friend of mine, Lady Constance Culmington. I 
hove not seen her for some years. She went to the East. It is exactly the kind of 

vague incoherent letter she would write, urging me to join her here and referring 

to her host and hostess in the vaguest of terms. The same technique, you will 

observe. I only mention it because it agrees with the other evidence from all of 
which emerges one interesting point. Whoever it was who enticed us here, that 

person knows or has taken the trouble to find out a good deal about us all. He, 

whoever he may be, is aware of my friendship for Lady Constance and is 
familiar with her epistolary style. He knows something about  DrArmstrong's 

colleagues and their present whereabouts. He knows the nickname of Mr. 

Marston's friend and the kind of telegrams he sends. He knows exactly where 

Miss Brent was two years ago for her holiday and the kind of people she met 

there. He knows all about General Macarthur's old cronies." 

He paused. Then he said: 

"He knows, you see, a good deal. And out of his knowledge concerning us, he 
has made certain definite accusations." 



Immediately a babel broke out. 

General Macarthur shouted: 

"Apack of damn lies! Slander!" 

Vera cried out: 

"It's iniquitous!" Her breath came fast. "Wicked!" 

Rogers said hoarsely: 

"A lie a wicked lie... we never did neither of us..." 

Anthony Marston growled: 

"Don't know what the damned fool was getting at!" 

The upraised hand of Mr.  JusticeWargrave calmed the tumult. 

He said, picking his words with care: 

"I wish to say this. Our unknown friend accuses me of the murder of one Edward 
Seton. I remember Seton perfectly well. He came up before me for trial in June 
of 

the year 1930. He was charged with the murder of an elderly woman. He was 

very ably defended and made a good impression on the jury in the witness box. 

Nevertheless, on the evidence, he was certainly guilty. I summed up accordingly, 

and the jury brought in a verdict of Guilty. In passing sentence of death I 
concurred with the verdict. An appeal was lodged on the grounds of 
misdirection. 

The appeal was rejected and the man was duly executed. I wish to say before 
you 

all that my conscience is perfectly clear on the matter. I did my duty and nothing 
more. I passed sentence on a rightly convicted murderer." 



DrArmstrong was remembering now. The Seton case! The verdict had come as a 

great surprise. He had met Matthews, K.C., on one of the days of the trial dining 

at a restaurant. Matthews had been confident. "Not a doubt of the verdict. 

Acquittal practically certain." And then afterwards he had heard comments: 

"JusticeWargrave was dead against him. Turned the jury right round and they brought him 
in guilty. Quite legal, though. Old JusticeWargrave knows his law." "It was almost as 
though he had a private down on the fellow." 

All these memories rushed through the doctor's mind. Before he could consider 
the wisdom of the question he had asked impulsively: 

"Did you know Seton at all? I mean previous to the case." 

The hooded reptilian eyes met his. In a clear cold voice the JusticeWargrave said: 

"I knew nothing of Seton previous to the case." 

DrArmstrong said to himself: 

"The fellow's lying I know he's lying." 

II 

Vera Claythorne spoke in a trembling voice. 

She said: 

"I'd like to tell you. About that child Cyril Hamilton. I was nursery governess to 
him. He was forbidden to swim out far. One day, when my attention was 
distracted, he started off. I swam after him... I couldn't get there in time... It was 
awful... But it wasn't my fault. At the inquest the Coroner exonerated me. And 

his mother she was so kind. If even she didn't blame me, why should why 

should this awful thing be said? It's not fair not fair..." 

She broke down, weeping bitterly. 



General Macarthur patted her shoulder. 

He said: 

"There, there, my dear. Of course it's not true. Fellow's a madman. A madman! 
Got a bee in his bonnet! Got hold of the wrong end of the stick all round." 

He stood erect, squaring his shoulders. He barked out: 

"Best really to leave this sort of thing unanswered. However, feel I ought to say 

no truth no truth whatsoever in what he said about er young Arthur Richmond. 
Richmond was one of my officers. I sent him on a reconnaissance. He 

was killed. Natural course of events in war time. Wish to say resent very much 

slur on my wife. Best woman in the world. Absolutely Caesar's wife!" 

General Macarthur sat down. His shaking hand pulled at his moustache. The 

effort to speak had cost him a good deal. 

Lombard spoke. His eyes were amused. He said: 

"About those natives " 

Marston said: 

"What about them?" 

Philip Lombard grinned. 

"Story's quite true! I left 'em! Matter of selfpreservation. We were lost in the 
bush. I and a couple of other fellows took what food there was and cleared out." 

General Macarthur said sternly: 

"You abandoned your men left them to starve?" 


Lombard said: 



"Not quite the act of a pukka sahib, I'm afraid. But selfpreservation's a man's first 
duty. And natives don't mind dying, you know. They don't feel about it as 

Europeans do." 

Vera lifted her face from her hands. She said, staring at him: 

"You left them to die?" 

Lombard answered: 

"I left them to die." 

His amused eyes looked into her horrified ones. 

Anthony Marston said in a slow puzzled voice: 

"I've just been thinking John and Lucy Combes. Must have been a couple of kids 
I ran over near Cambridge. Beastly bad luck." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave said acidly: 

"Lor them, or for you?" 

Anthony said: 

"Well, I was thinking for me but of course, you're right, sir, it was damned bad 
luck on them. Of course it was a pure accident. They rushed out of some cottage 

or other. I had my licence endorsed for a year. Beastly nuisance." 

 DrArmstrong said warmly: 

"This speeding's all wrong all wrong! Young men like you are a danger to the 
community." 

Anthony shrugged his shoulders. 

He said: 

"Speed's come to stay. English roads are hopeless, of course. Can't get up a 



decent pace on them." 

He looked round vaguely for his glass, picked it up off a table and went over to 
the side table and helped himself to another whiskey and soda. He said over his 
shoulder: 

"Well, anyway, it wasn't my fault. Just an accident!" 

Ill 

The manservant, Rogers, had been moistening his lips and twisting his hands. 

He said now in a low deferential voice: 

"If I might just say a word, sir." 

Lombard said: 

"Go ahead, Rogers." 

Rogers cleared his throat and passed his tongue once more over his dry lips. 

"There was a mention, sir, of me and Mrs. Rogers. And of Miss Brady. There 
isn't a word of truth in it, sir. My wife and I were with Miss Brady till she died. 
She 

was always in poor health, sir, always from the time we came to her. There was a 

storm, sir, that night the night she was taken bad. The telephone was out of 

order. We couldn't get the doctor to her. I went for him, sir, on foot. But he got 
there too late. We'd done everything possible for her, sir. Devoted to her, we 

were. Any one will tell you the same. There was never a word said against us. 

Not a word." 

Lombard looked thoughtfully at the man's twitching face, his dry lips, the fright 



in his eyes. He remembered the crash of the falling coffee tray. He thought, but 
did not say, "Oh, yea?" 

Blore spoke spoke in his hearty bullying official manner. 

He said: 

"Came into a little something at her death, though? Eh?" 

Rogers drew himself up. He said stiffly: 

"Miss Brady left us a legacy in recognition of our faithful services. And why not, 
I'd like to know?" 

Lombard said: 

"What about yourself, Mr. Blore?" 

"What about me?" 

"Your name was included in the list." 

Blore went purple. 

"Landor, you mean? That was the bank robbery London and Commercial." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave stirred. He said: 

"I remember. It didn't come before me, but I remember the case. Landor was 
convicted on your evidence. You were the police officer in charge of the case?" 
Blore said: 

"I was." 

"Landor got penal servitude for life and died in Dartmoor a year later. He was a 
delicate man." 


Blore said: 



"He was a crook. It was he who knocked out the night watchman. The case was 
quite clear against him." 

JusticeWargrave said slowly: 

"You were complimented, I think, on your able handling of the case." 

Blore said sulkily: 

"I got my promotion." 

He added in a thick voice: 

"I was only doing my duty." 

Lombard laughed a sudden ringing laugh. He said: 

"What a dutyloving, lawabiding lot we all seem to be! Myself excepted. What 
about you, doctor and your little professional mistake? Illegal operation, was 

it?" 

Emily Brent glanced at him in sharp distaste and drew herself away a little. 

 DrArmstrong, very much master of himself, shook his head goodhumouredly. 

"I'm at a loss to understand the matter," he said. "The name meant nothing to me 
when it was spoken. What was it Clees? Close? I really can't remember having a 

patient of that name, or being connected with a death in any way. The thing's a 

complete mystery to me. Of course, it's a long time ago. It might possibly be one 

of my operation cases in hospital. They come too late, so many of these people. 

Then, when the patient dies, they always consider it's the surgeon's fault." 

He sighed, shaking his head. 

He thought: 



"Drunk that's what it was drunk... And I operated! Nerves all to pieces hands 
shaking. I killed her, all right. Poor devil elderly woman simple job if I'd been 

sober. Lucky for me there's loyalty in our profession. The Sister knew, of course 

but she held her tongue, God, it gave me a shock! Pulled me up. But who could 

have known about it after all these years?" 

IV 

There was a silence in the room. Everybody was looking, covertly or openly, at 
Emily Brent. It was a minute or two before she became aware of the expectation. 
Her eyebrows rose on her narrow forehead. She said: 

"Are you waiting for me to say something? I have nothing to say." 

The JusticeWargrave said: 

"Nothing, Miss Brent?" 

"Nothing." 

Her lips closed tightly. 

The JusticeWargrave stroked his face. He said mildly: 

"You reserve your defence?" 

Miss Brent said coldly: 

"There is no question of defence. I have always acted in accordance with the 

dictates of my conscience. I have nothing with which to reproach myself." 

There was an unsatisfied feeling in the air. But Emily Brent was not one to be 
swayed by public opinion. She sat unyielding. 

The JusticeWargrave cleared his throat once or twice. Then he said: 



"Our inquiry rests there. Now, Rogers, who else is there on this island besides 
ourselves and you and your wife?" 

"Nobody, sir. Nobody at all." 

"You're sure of that?" 

"Quite sure, sir." 

JusticeWargrave said: 

"I am not yet clear as to the purpose of our Unknown host in getting us to 
assemble here. But in my opinion this person, whoever he may be, is not sane in 
the accepted sense of the word. 

"He may be dangerous. In my opinion it would be well for us to leave this place 
as soon as possible. I suggest that we leave tonight." 

Rogers said: 

"I beg your pardon, sir, but there's no boat on the island." 

"No boat at all?" 

"No, sir." 

"How do you communicate with the mainland?" 

"Fred Narracott, he comes over every morning, sir. He brings the bread and the 
milk and the post, and takes the orders." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave said: 

"Then in my opinion it would be well if we all left tomorrow morning as soon as 
Narracott's boat arrives." 

There was a chorus of agreement with only one dissentient voice. It was 
Anthony 



Marston who disagreed with the majority. 

"A bit unsporting, what?" he said. "Ought to ferret out the mystery before we go. 
Whole thing's like a detective story. Positively thrilling." 

The JusticeWargrave said acidly: 

"At my time of life, I have no desire for 'thrills,' as you call them." 

Anthony said with a grin: 

"The legal life's narrowing! I'm all for crime! Here's to it." 

He picked up his drink and drank it off at a gulp. 

Too quickly, perhaps. He choked choked badly. His face contorted, turned 
purple. He gasped for breath then slid down off his chair, the glass falling from 
his hand. 

Chapter 5 

It was so sudden and so unexpected that it took every one's breath away. They 
remained stupidly staring at the crumpled figure on the ground. 

Then  DrArmstrong jumped up and went over to him, kneeling beside him. 
When he raised his head his eyes were bewildered. 

He said in a low awestruck whisper: 

"My God! he's dead!" 

They didn't take it in. Not at once. 

Dead? Dead? That young Norse God in the prime of his health and strength. 
Struck down all in a moment. Healthy young men didn't die like that, choking 
over a whiskey and soda... 



No, they couldn't take it in. 

 DrArmstrong was peering into the dead man's face. He sniffed at the blue 
twisted lips. Then he picked up the glass from which Anthony Marston had been 
drinking. 

General Macarthur said: 

"Dead: D'you mean the fellow just choked and and died?" 

The physician said: 

"You can call it choking if you like. He died of asphyxiation right enough." 

He was sniffing now at the glass. He dipped a finger into the dregs and very 
cautiously just touched the finger with the tip of his tongue. 

His expression altered. 

General Macarthur said: 

"Never knew a man could die like that just of a choking fit!" 

Emily Brent said in a clear voice: 

"In the midst of life we are in death." 

 DrArmstrong stood up. He said brusquely: 

"No, a man doesn't die of a mere choking fit. Marston's death wasn't what we 
call a natural death." 

Vera said almost in a whisper: 

"Was there something in the whiskey?" 


DrArmstrong nodded. 



"Yes. Can't say exactly. Everything points to one of the cyanides. No distinctive 
smell of Prussic Acid, probably Potassium Cyanide. It acts pretty well 
instantaneously." 

The JusticeWargrave said sharply: 

"It was in his glass?" 

"Yes." 

The doctor strode to the table where the drinks were. He removed the stopper 
from the whiskey and smelt and tasted it. Then he tasted the soda water. He 
shook his head. 

"They're both all right." 

Lombard said: 

"You mean he must have put the stuff in his glass himself!" 

DrArmstrong nodded with a curiously dissatisfied expression. He said: 

"Seems like it." 

Blore said: 

"Suicide, eh? That's a queer go." 

Vera said slowly: 

"You'd never think that he would kill himself. He was so alive. He was oh 
enjoying himself! When he came down the hill in his car this evening he looked 
he looked oh, I can't explain!" 


But they knew what she meant. Anthony Marston, in the height of his youth and 
manhood, had seemed like a being who was immortal. And now, crumpled and 



broken, he lay on the floor. 

 DrArmstrong said: 

"Is there any possibility other than suicide?" 

Slowly every one shook his head. There could be no other explanation. The 
drinks 

themselves were untampered with. They had all seen Anthony Marston go across 
and help himself. It followed therefore that any Cyanide in the drink must have 
been put there by Anthony Marston himself. 

And yet why should Anthony Marston commit suicide? 

Blore said thoughtfully: 

"You know, doctor, it doesn't seem right to me. I shouldn't have said Mr. Marston 
was a suicidal type of gentleman." 

DrArmstrong answered: 

"I agree." 

II 

They had left it like that. What else was there to say? 

Together DrArmstrong and Lombard had carried the inert body of Anthony 
Marston to his bedroom and had laid him there covered over with a sheet. 

When they came downstairs again, the others were standing in a group, shivering 
a little, though the night was not cold. 

Emily Brent said: 

"We'd better go to bed. It's late." 

It was past twelve o'clock. The suggestion was a wise one yet every one 



hesitated. It was as though they clung to each other's company for reassurance. 
The JusticeWargrave said: 

"Yes, we must get some sleep." 

Rogers said: 

"I haven't cleared yet in the diningroom." 

Lombard said curtly: 

"Do it in the morning." 

DrArmstrong said to him: 

"Is your wife all right?" 

"I'll go and see, sir." 

He returned a minute or two later. 

"Sleeping beautiful, she is." 

"Good," said the doctor. "Don't disturb her." 

"No, sir. I'll just put things straight in the diningroom and make sure everything' 
locked up right, and then I'll turn in." 

He went across the hall into the diningroom. 

The others went upstairs, a slow unwilling procession. 

If this had been an old house, with creaking wood, and dark shadows, and 
heavily panelled walls, there might have been an eerie feeling. But this house 

was the essence of modernity. There were no dark corners no possible sliding 

panels it was flooded with electric light everything was new and bright and 

shining. There was nothing hidden in this house, nothing concealed. It had no 



atmosphere about it. 

Somehow, that was the most frightening thing of all... 

They exchanged goodnights on the upper landing. Each of them went into his or 

her own room, and each of them automatically, almost without conscious 
thought, locked the door... 

Ill 

In his pleasant softly tinted room, Mr.  JusticeWargrave removed his garments 
and prepared himself for bed. 

He was thinking about Edward Seton. 

He remembered Seton very well. His fair hair, his blue eyes, his habit of looking 
you straight in the face with a pleasant air of straightforwardness. That was 

what had made so good an impression on the jury. 

Llewellyn, for the Crown, had bungled it a bit. He had been overvehement, had 
tried to prove too much. 

Matthews, on the other hand, for the Defence, had been good. His points had 
told. His crossexaminations had been deadly. His handling of his client in the 
witness box had been masterly. 

And Seton had come through the ordeal of crossexamination well. He had not 
got excited or overvehement. The jury had been impressed. It had seemed to 
Matthews, perhaps, as though everything had been over bar the shouting. 

The JusticeWargrave wound up his watch carefully and placed it by the bed. 

He remembered exactly how he had felt sitting there listening, making notes, 



appreciating everything, tabulating every scrap of evidence that told against the 
prisoner. 

He'd enjoyed that case! Matthews' final speech had been firstclass. Llewellyn, 
coming after it, had failed to remove the good impression that the defending 
counsel had made. 

And then had come his own summing up... 

Carefully, Mr.  JusticeWargrave removed his false teeth and dropped them into a 
glass of water. The shrunken lips fell in. It was a cruel mouth now, cruel and 
predatory. 

Hooding his eyes, the JusticeWargrave smiled to himself. 

He'd cooked Seton's goose all right! 

With a slightly rheumatic grunt, he climbed into bed and turned out the electric 
light. 

IV 

Downstairs in the diningroom, Rogers stood puzzled. 

He was staring at the china figures in the centre of the table. 

He muttered to himself: 

"That's a rum go! I could have sworn there were ten of them." 

V 

General Macarthur tossed from side to side. 


Sleep would not come to him. 



In the darkness he kept seeing Arthur Richmond's face. 

He'd liked Arthur he'd been damned fond of Arthur. He'd been pleased that 
Leslie liked him too. 

Leslie was so capricious. Lots of good fellows that Leslie would turn up her nose 
at and pronounce dull. "Dull!" Just like that. 

But she hadn't found Arthur Richmond dull. They'd got on well together from 
the 

beginning. They'd talked of plays and music and pictures together. She'd teased 
him, made fun of him, ragged him. And he, Macarthur, had been delighted at the 
thought that Leslie took quite a motherly interest in the boy. 

Motherly indeed! Damn fool not to remember that Richmond was twentyeight to 
Leslie's twentynine. 

He'd loved Leslie. He could see her now. Her heartshaped face, and her dancing 
deep grey eyes, and the brown curling mass of her hair. He'd loved Leslie and 
he'd believed in her absolutely. 

Out there in France, in the middle of all the hell of it, he'd sat thinking of her, 
taken her picture out of the breast pocket of his tunic. 

And then he'd found out! 

It had come about exactly in the way things happened in books. The letter in the 
wrong envelope. She'd been writing to them both and she'd put her letter to 
Richmond in the envelope addressed to her husband. Even now, all these years 
later, he could feel the shock of it the pain... 



God, it had hurt! 

And the business had been going on some time. The letter made that clear. 
Weekends! Richmond's last leave... 

Leslie Leslie and Arthur! 

God damn the fellow! Damn his smiling face, his brisk "Yes, sir." Liar and 
hypocrite! Stealer of another man's wife! 

It had gathered slowly that cold murderous rage. 

He'd managed to carry on as usual to show nothing. He'd tried to make his 
manner to Richmond just the same. 

Had he succeeded? He thought so. Richmond hadn't suspected. Inequalities of 
temper were easily accounted for out there, where men's nerves were continually 
snapping under the strain. 

Only young Armitage had looked at him curiously once or twice. Quite a young 
chap, but he'd had perceptions, that boy. 

Armitage, perhaps, had guessed when the time came. 

He'd sent Richmond deliberately to death. Only a miracle could have brought 
him 

through unhurt. That miracle didn't happen. Yes, he'd sent Richmond to his 
death and he wasn't sorry. It had been easy enough. Mistakes were being made 
all the time, officers being sent to death needlessly. All was confusion, panic. 
People might say afterwards, "Old Macarthur lost his nerve a bit, made some 
colossal blunders, sacrificed some of his best men." They couldn't say more. 



But young Armitage was different. He'd looked at his commanding officer very 

oddly. He'd known, perhaps, that Richmond was being deliberately sent to death. 

(And after the War was over had Armitage talked?) 

Leslie hadn't known. Leslie had wept for her lover (he supposed) but her 
weeping was over by the time he'd come back to England. He'd never told her 
that he'd 

found her out. They'd gone on together only, somehow, she hadn't seemed very 
real any more. And then, three or four years later, she'd got double pneumonia 
and died. 

That had been a long time ago. Fifteen years sixteen years? 

And he'd left the Army and come to live in Devon bought the sort of little place 
he'd always meant to have. Nice neighbours pleasant part of the world. There 

was a bit of shooting and fishing. He'd gone to church on Sundays. (But not the 

day that the lesson was read about David putting Uriah in the forefront of the 

battle. Somehow he couldn't face that. Gave him an uncomfortable feeling.) 

Everybody had been very friendly. At first, that is. Later, he'd had an uneasy 

feeling that people were talking about him behind his back. They eyed him 
differently, somehow. As though they'd heard something some lying rumour... 

(Armitage? Supposing Armitage had talked?) 

He'd avoided people after that withdrawn into himself. Unpleasant to feel that 
people were discussing you. 

And all so long ago. So so purposeless now. Leslie had faded into the distance 
and Arthur Richmond, too. Nothing of what had happened seemed to matter any 



more. 


It made life lonely, though. He'd taken to shunning his old Army friends. 

(If Armitage had talked, they'd know about it.) 

And now this evening a hidden voice had blared out that old hidden story. 

Had he dealt with it all right? Kept a stiff upper lip? Betrayed the right amount 

of feeling indignation, disgust but no guilt, no discomfiture? Difficult to tell. 

Surely nobody could have taken the accusation seriously. There had been a pack 

of other nonsense, just as farfetched. That charming girl the voice had accused 
her of drowning a child! Idiotic! Some madman throwing crazy accusations 
about! 

Emily Brent, too actually a niece of old Tom Brent of the Regiment. It had 

accused her of murder! Any one could see with half an eye that the woman was 

as pious as could be the kind that was hand and glove with parsons. 

Damned curious business the whole thing! Crazy, nothing less. 

Ever since they had got there when was that? Why, damn it, it was only this 

afternoon! Seemed a good bit longer than that. 

He thought: "I wonder when we shall get away again." 

Tomorrow, of course, when the motor boat came from the mainland. 

Funny, just this minute he didn't want much to get away from the island... To go 

back to the mainland, back to his little house, back to all the troubles and 
worries. Through the open window he could hear the waves breaking on the 
rocks 

a little louder now than earlier in the evening. Wind was getting up, too. 



He thought: "Peaceful sound. Peaceful place..." 

He thought: "Best of an island is once you get there you can't go any further... 
you've come to the end of things..." 

He knew, suddenly, that he didn't want to leave the island. 

VI 

Vera Claythorne lay in bed, wide awake, staring up at the ceiling. 

The light beside her was on. She was frightened of the dark. 

She was thinking: 

"Hugo... Hugo... Why do I feel you're so near to me tonight?... Somewhere quite 
close... 

"Where is he really? I don't know. I never shall know. He just went away right 
away out of my life!" 

It was no good trying not to think of Hugo. He was close to her. She had to think 
of him to remember... 

Cornwall... 

The black rocks, the smooth yellow sand. Mrs. Hamilton, stout, goodhumoured. 
Cyril, whining a little always, pulling at her hand. 

"I want to swim out to the rock. Miss Claythorne. Why can't I swim out to the 
rock?" 

Looking up meeting Hugo's eyes watching her. 

The evenings after Cyril was in bed... 

"Come out for a stroll, Miss Claythorne." 



"I think perhaps I will." 

The decorous stroll down to the beach. The moonlight the soft Atlantic air. 

And then, Hugo's arm round her. 

"I love you, I love you. You know I love you, Vera?" 

Yes, she knew. 

(Or thought she knew.) 

"I can't ask you to marry me. I've not got a penny. Its all I can do to keep myself. 
Queer, you know, once, for three months I had the chance of being a rich man to 
look forward to. Cyril wasn't born until three months after Maurice died. If he'd 
been a girl..." 

If the child has been a girl, Hugo would have come into everything. He'd been 
disappointed, he admitted. 

"I hadn't built on it, of course. But it was a bit of a knock. Oh, well, luck's luck! 
Cyril's a nice kid. I'm awfully fond of him." 

And he was fond of him, too. Always ready to play games or amuse his small 
nephew. No rancour in Hugo's nature. 

Cyril wasn't really strong. A puny child no stamina. The kind of child, perhaps, 
who wouldn't live to grow up... 

And then ? 

"Miss Claythorne, why can't I swim to the rock?" 


Irritating whiney repetition. 



"It s too far, Cyril." 

"But, Miss Claythorne..." 

Vera got up. She went to the dressingtable and swallowed three aspirins. 

She thought: 

"I wish I had some proper sleeping stuff." 

She thought: 

"If I were doing away with myself I'd take an overdose of veronal something like 
that not cyanide!" 

She shuddered as she remembered Anthony Marston's convulsed purple face. 

As she passed the mantelpiece, she looked up at the framed doggerel. 

Ten little Indian boys went out to dine; 

One choked his little self and then there were nine. 

She thought to herself: 

"It's horrible just like us this evening..." 

Why had Anthony Marston wanted to die? 

She didn't want to die. 

She couldn't imagine wanting to die... 

Death was for the other people... 



Chapter 6 

 DrArmstrong was dreaming... 

It was very hot in the operating room... 

Surely they'd got the temperature too high? The sweat was rolling down his face. 
His hands were clammy. Difficult to hold the scalpel firmly... 

How beautifully sharp it was... 

Easy to do a murder with a knife like that. And of course he was doing a 
murder... 

The woman's body looked different. It had been a large unwieldy body. This was 
a spare meagre body. And the face was hidden. 

Who was it that he had to kill? 

He couldn't remember. But he must know! Should he ask Sister? 

Sister was watching him. No, he couldn't ask her. She was suspicious, he could 
see that. 

But who was it on the operating table? 

They shouldn't have covered up the face like that... 

If he could only see the face... 

Ah! that was better. A young probationer was pulling off the handkerchief. 

Emily Brent, of course. It was Emily Brent that he had to kill. 

How malicious her eyes were! Her lips were moving. What was she saying? 


"In the midst of life we are in death..." 



She was laughing now. No, nurse, don't put the handkerchief back. I've got to 
see. I've got to give the anaesthetic. Where's the ether? I must have brought the 
ether with me. What have you done with the ether, Sister? ChBteau Neuf du 
Pape? Yes, that will do quite as well. 

Take the handkerchief away, nurse. 

Of course! I knew it all the time! It's Anthony Marston! His face is purple and 
convulsed. But he's not dead he's laughing. I tell you he's laughing! He's shaking 
the operating table. 

Look out, man, look out. Nurse, steady it steady it 

With a start  DrArmstrong woke up. It was morning. Sunlight was pouring into 
the room. 

And some one was leaning over him shaking him. It was Rogers. Rogers, with a 
white face, saying: "Doctor doctor!" 

 DrArmstrong woke up completely. 

He sat up in bed. He said sharply: 

"What is it?" 

"It's the wife, doctor. I can't get her to wake. My God! I can't get her to wake. 
And 

and she don't look right to me." 

 DrArmstrong was quick and efficient. He wrapped himself in his dressinggown 
and followed Rogers. 


He bent over the bed where the woman was lying peacefully on her side. He 
lifted 



the cold hand, raised the eyelid. It was some few minutes before he straightened 
himself and turned from the bed. 

Rogers whispered: 

"Is she is she ?" 

He passed a tongue over dry lips. 

DrArmstrong nodded. 

"Yes, she's gone." 

His eyes rested thoughtfully on the man before him. Then they went to the table 
by the bed, to the washstand, then back to the sleeping woman. 

Rogers said: 

"Was it was it 'er 'eart, doctor?" 

 DrArmstrong was a minute or two before replying. Then he said: 

"What was her health like normally?" 

Rogers said: 

"She was a bit rheumaticky." 

"Any doctor been attending her recently?" 

"Doctor?" Rogers stared. "Not been to a doctor for years neither of us." 

"You'd no reason to believe she suffered from heart trouble?" 

"No, doctor. I never knew of anything." 

DrArmstrong said: 

"Did she sleep well?" 



Now Rogers' eyes evaded his. The man's hands came together and turned and 
twisted uneasily. He muttered. 

"She didn't sleep extra well no." 

The doctor said sharply: 

"Did she take things to make her sleep?" 

Rogers stared at him, surprised. 

"Take things? To make her sleep? Not that I knew of. I'm sure she didn't." 
DrArmstrong went over to the washstand. 

There were a certain number of bottles on it. Hair lotion, lavender water, cascara, 
glycerine of cucumber for the hands, a mouthwash, toothpaste and some 

Elliman's. 

Rogers helped by pulling out the drawers of the dressingtable. From there they 
moved on to the chest of drawers. But there was no sign of sleeping draughts or 
tablets. 

Rogers said: 

"She didn't have nothing last night, sir, except what you gave her..." 

II 

When the gong sounded for breakfast at nine o'clock it found every one up and 
awaiting the summons. 

General Macarthur and the JusticeWargrave had been pacing the terrace outside, 
exchanging desultory comments on the political situation. 

Vera Claythorne and Philip Lombard had been up to the summit of the island 



behind the house. There they had discovered William Henry Blore, standing 
staring at the mainland. 

He said: 

"No sign of that motor boat yet. I've been watching for it." 

Vera said, smiling: 

"Devon's a sleepy county. Things are usually late." 

Philip Lombard was looking the other way, out to sea. 

He said abruptly: 

"What d'you think of the weather?" 

Glancing up at the sky, Blore remarked: 

"Looks all right to me." 

Lombard pursed up his mouth into a whistle. 

He said: 

"It will come on to blow before the day's out." 

Blore said: 

"Squally eh?" 

From below them came the boom of a gong. 

Philip Lombard said: 

"Breakfast? Well, I could do with some." 

As they went down the steep slope Blore said to Lombard in a ruminating voice: 

"You know, it beats me why that young fellow wanted to do himself in! I've been 
worrying about it all night." 



Vera was a little ahead. Lombard hung back slightly. He said: 

"Got any alternative theory?" 

"I'd want some proof. Motive, to begin with. Welloff I should say he was." 
Emily Brent came out of the drawingroom window to meet them. 

She said sharply: 

"Is the boat coming?" 

"Not yet," said Vera. 

They went in to breakfast. There was a vast dish of eggs and bacon on the 
sideboard and tea and coffee. 

Rogers held the door open for them to pass in, then shut it from the outside. 
Emily Brent said: 

"That man looks ill this morning." 

 DrArmstrong, who was standing by the window, cleared his throat. He said: 

"You must excuse any er shortcomings this morning. Rogers has had to do the 
best he can for breakfast singlehanded. Mrs. Rogers has er not been able to 

carry on this morning." 

Emily Brent said sharply: 

"What's the matter with the woman?" 

 DrArmstrong said easily: 

"Let us start our breakfast. The eggs will be cold. Afterwards, there are several 
matters I want to discuss with you all." 

They took the hint. Plates were filled, coffee and tea was poured. The meal 



began. 

Discussion of the island was, by mutual consent, tabooed. They spoke instead in 
a desultory fashion of current events. The news from abroad, events in the world 

of sport, the latest reappearance of the Loch Ness monster. 

Then, when plates were cleared,  DrArmstrong moved back his chair a little, 

cleared his throat importantly and spoke. 

He said: 

"I thought it better to wait until you had had your breakfast before telling you of 
a sad piece of news. Mrs. Rogers died in her sleep." 

There were startled and shocked ejaculations. 

Vera exclaimed: 

"How awful! Two deaths on this island since we arrived!" 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave, his eyes narrowed, said in his small precise clear voice: 
"H'm very remarkable what was the cause of death?" 

DrArmstrong shrugged his shoulders. 

"Impossible to say offhand." 

"There must be an autopsy?" 

"I certainly couldn't give a certificate. I have no knowledge whatsoever of the 
woman's state of health." 

Vera said: 

"She was a very nervouslooking creature. And she had a shock last night. It 
might have been heart failure, I suppose?" 



 DrArmstrong said drily: 

"Her heart certainly failed to beat but what caused it to fail is the question." 

One word fell from Emily Brent. It fell hard and clear into the listening group. 
"Conscience!" she said. 

DrArmstrong turned to her. 

"What exactly do you mean by that, Miss Brent?" 

Emily Brent, her lips tight and hard, said: 

"You all heard. She was accused, together with her husband, of having 
deliberately murdered her former employer an old lady." 

"And you think?" 

Emily Brent said: 

"I think that that accusation was true. You all saw her last night. She broke down 
completely and fainted. The shock of having her wickedness brought home 

to her was too much for her. She literally died of fear." 

 DrArmstrong shook his head doubtfully. 

"It is a possible theory," he said. "One cannot adopt it without more exact 
knowledge of her state of health. If there was cardiac weakness " 

Emily Brent said quietly. 

"Call it, if you prefer, an Act of God." 

Every one looked shocked. Mr. Blore said uneasily: 

"That's carrying things a bit far, Miss Brent." 

She looked at them with shining eyes. Her chin went up. She said: 



"You regard it as impossible that a sinner should be struck down by the wrath of 
God! I do not!" 


The JusticeWargrave stroked his chin. He murmured in a slightly ironic voice: 

"My dear lady, in my experience of illdoing, Providence leaves the work of 
conviction and chastisement to us mortals and the process is often fraught with 

difficulties. There are no short cuts." 

Emily Brent shrugged her shoulders. 

Blore said sharply: 

"What did she have to eat and drink last night after she went up to bed?" 
DrArmstrong said: 

"Nothing." 

"She didn't take anything? A cup of tea? A drink of water? I'll bet you she had a 
cup of tea. That sort always does." 

"Rogers assures me she had nothing whatsoever." 

"Ah," said Blore. "But he might say so!" 

His tone was so significant that the doctor looked at him sharply. 

Philip Lombard said: 

"So that's your idea?" 

Blore said aggressively: 

"Well, why not? We all heard that accusation last night. May be sheer moonshine 

just plain lunacy! On the other hand, it may not. Allow for the moment that it's 
true. Rogers and his missus polished off that old lady. Well, where does that get 

you? They've been feeling quite safe and happy about it " 



Vera interrupted. In a low voice she said: 

"No, I don't think Mrs. Rogers ever felt safe." 

Blore looked slightly annoyed at the interruption. "Just like a woman," his 
glance said. 

He resumed: 

"That's as may be. Anyway there's no active danger to them as far as they know. 

Then, last night, some unknown lunatic spills the beans. What happens? The 

woman cracks she goes to pieces. Notice how her husband hung over her as she 

was coming round. Not all husbandly solicitude! Not on your life! He was like a 

cat on hot bricks. Scared out of his life as to what she might say. 

"And there's the position for you! They've done a murder and got away with it. 

But if the whole thing's going to be raked up, what's going to happen? Ten to 
one, the woman will give the show away. She hasn't got the nerve to stand up 
and 

brazen it out. She's a living danger to her husband, that's what she is. He's all 

right. He'll lie with a straight face till kingdom comes but he can't be sure of her! 
And if she goes to pieces, his neck's in danger! So he slips something into a cup 
of tea and makes sure that her mouth is shut permanently." 

DrArmstrong said slowly: 

"There was no empty cup by her bedside there was nothing there at all. I 
looked." 

Blore snorted. 

"Of course there wouldn't be! First thing he'd do when she'd drunk it would be to 
take that cup and saucer away and wash it up carefully." 



There was a pause. Then General Macarthur said doubtfully: 

"It may be so. But I should hardly think it possible that a man would do that to 
his wife." 

Blore gave a short laugh. 

He said: 

"When a man's neck's in danger, he doesn't stop to think too much about 
sentiment." 

There was a pause. Before any one could speak, the door opened and Rogers 
came 

in. 

He said, looking from one to the other: 

"Is there anything more I can get you? I'm sorry there was so little toast, but 
we've run right out of bread. The new bread hasn't come over from the mainland 

yet." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave stirred a little in his chair. He asked: 

"What time does the motor boat usually come over?" 

"Between seven and eight, sir. Sometimes it's a bit after eight. Don't know what 
Fred Narracott can be doing this morning. If he's ill he'd send his brother." 

Philip Lombard said: 

"What's the time now?" 

"Ten minutes to ten, sir." 

Lombard's eyebrows rose. He nodded slowly to himself. 

Rogers waited a minute or two. 



General Macarthur spoke suddenly and explosively. 

"Sorry to hear about your wife, Rogers. Doctor's just been telling us." 

Rogers inclined his head. 

"Yes, sir. Thank you, sir." 

He took up the empty bacon dish and went out. 

Again there was silence. 

Ill 

On the terrace outside Philip Lombard said: 

"About this motor boat " 

Blore looked at him. 

Blore nodded his head. 

He said: 

"I know what you're thinking, Mr. Lombard. I've asked myself the same 
question. 

Motor boat ought to have been here nigh on two hours ago. It hasn't come? 
Why?" 

"Found the answer?" asked Lombard. 

"It's not an accident that's what I say. It's part and parcel of the whole business. 
It's all bound up together." 

Philip Lombard said: 

"It won't come, you think?" 

A voice spoke behind him a testy impatient voice. 



"The motor boat's not coming," he said. 

Blore turned his square shoulder slightly and viewed the last speaker 
thoughtfully. 

"You think not too, General?" 

General Macarthur said sharply: 

"Of course it won't come. We're counting on the motor boat to take us off the 
island. That's the meaning of the whole business. We're not going to leave the 

island... None of us will ever leave... Il's the end, you see the end of 
everything..." 

He hesitated, then he said in a low strange voice: 

"That's peace real peace. To come to the end not to have to go on... Yes, peace..." 
He turned abruptly and walked away. Along the terrace, then down the slope 
towards the sea obliquely to the end of the island where loose rocks went out 
into the water. 

He walked a little unsteadily, like a man who was only half awake. 

Blore said: 

"There goes another one who's balmy! Looks as though it'll end with the whole 
lot going that way." 

Philip Lombard said: 

"I don't fancy you will, Blore." 

The exinspector laughed. 

"It would take a lot to send me off my head." He added drily: "And I don't think 
you'll be going that way either, Mr. Lombard." 



Philip Lombard said: 

"I feel quite sane at the minute, thank you." 

IV 

 DrArmstrong came out onto the terrace. He stood there hesitating. To his left 

were Blore and Lombard. To his right was JusticeWargrave, slowly pacing up and 
down, 

his head bent down. 

DrArmstrong, after a moment of indecision, turned towards the latter. 

But at that moment Rogers came quickly out of the house. 

"Could I have a word with you, sir, please?" 

DrArmstrong turned. 

He was startled at what he saw. 

Rogers' face was working. Its colour was greyish green. His hands shook. 

It was such a contrast to his restraint of a few minutes ago that DrArmstrong was 
quite taken aback. 

"Please, sir, if I could have a word with you. Inside, sir." 

The doctor turned back and reentered the house with the frenzied butler. He 
said: 

"What's the matter, man? Pull yourself together." 

"In here, sir, come in here." 

He opened the diningroom door. The doctor passed in. Rogers followed him and 



shut the door behind him. 


"Well," said DrArmstrong, "what is it?" 

The muscles of Rogers' throat were working. He was swallowing. He jerked out 

"There's things going on, sir, that I don't understand." 

DrArmstrong said sharply: "Things? What things?" 

"You'll think I'm crazy, sir. You'll say it isn't anything. But it's got to be 
explained, sir. It's got to be explained. Because it doesn't make any sense." 

"Well, man, tell me what it is? Don't go on talking in riddles." 

Rogers swallowed again. 

He said: 

"It's those little figures, sir. In the middle of the table. The little china figures. 
Ten of them, there were. I'll swear to that, ten of them." 

DrArmstrong said: 

"Yes, ten. We counted them last night at dinner." 

Rogers came nearer. 

"That's just it, sir. Last night, when I was clearing up, there wasn't but nine, sir. 

I noticed it and thought it queer. But that's all I thought. And now, sir, this 

morning. I didn't notice when I laid the breakfast. I was upset and all that. 

"But now, sir, when I came to clear away. See for yourself if you don't believe 
me. 

"There's only eight, sir! Only eight! It doesn't make sense, does it? Only eight..." 



Chapter 7 


After breakfast, Emily Brent had suggested to Vera Claythorne that they should 
walk up to the summit again and watch for the boat. Vera had acquiesced. 

The wind had freshened. Small white crests were appearing on the sea. There 

were no fishing boats out and no sign of the motor boat. 

The actual village of Sticklehaven could not be seen, only the hill above it, a 

juttingout cliff of red rock concealed the actual little bay. 

Emily Brent said: 

"The man who brought us out yesterday seemed a dependable sort of person. It 
is really very odd that he should be so late this morning." 

Vera did not answer. She was fighting down a rising feeling of panic. 

She said to herself angrily: 

"You must keep cool. This isn't like you. You've always had excellent nerves." 
Aloud she said after a minute or two: 

"I wish he would come. 11 want to get away." 

Emily Brent said drily: 

"I've no doubt we all do." 

Vera said: 

"It's all so extraordinary... There seems no no meaning in it all." 

The elderly woman beside her said briskly: 

"I'm very annoyed with myself for being so easily taken in. Really that letter is 



absurd when one comes to examine it. But I had no doubts at the time none at 


all." 

Vera murmured mechanically: 

"I suppose not." 

"One takes things for granted too much," said Emily Brent. 

Vera drew a deep shuddering breath. 

She said: 

"Do you really think what you said at breakfast?" 

"Be a little more precise, my dear. To what in particular are you referring?" 

Vera said in a low voice: 

"Do you really think that Rogers and his wife did away with that old lady?" 
Emily Brent gazed thoughtfully out to sea. Then she said: 

"Personally, I am quite sure of it. What do you think?" 

"I don't know what to think." 

Emily Brent said: 

"Everything goes to support the idea. The way the woman fainted. And the man 

dropped the coffee tray, remember. Then the way he spoke about it it didn't ring 
true. Oh, yes, I'm afraid they did it." 

Vera said: 

"The way she looked scared of her own shadow! I've never seen a woman look 
so frightened... She must have been always haunted by it..." 


Miss Brent murmured: 



"I remember a text that hung in my nursery as a child. 'Be sure thy sin will find 
thee out.' It's very true, that. 'Be sure thy sin will find thee out.'" 

Vera scrambled to her feet. She said: 

"But, Miss Brent Miss Brent in that case " 

"Yes, my dear?" 

"The others? What about the others?" 

"I don't quite understand you." 

"All the other accusations they they weren't true? But if it's true about the 
Rogerses " She stopped, unable to make her chaotic thought clear. 

Emily Brent's brow, which had been frowning perplexedly, cleared. 

She said: 

"Ah, I understand you now. Well, there is that Mr. Lombard. He admits to having 
abandoned twenty men to their deaths." 

Vera said: 

"They were only natives..." 

Emily Brent said sharply: 

"Black or white, they are our brothers." 

Vera thought: 

"Our black brothers our black brothers. Oh, I'm going to laugh. I'm hysterical. 

I'm not myself..." 

Emily Brent continued thoughtfully: 

"Of course, some of the other accusations were very farfetched and ridiculous. 



Against the JusticeWargrave, for instance, who was only doing his duty in his public 
capacity, And the exScotland Yard man. My own case, too." 

She paused and then went on: 

"Naturally, considering the circumstances, I was not going to say anything last 
night. It was not a fit subject to discuss before gentlemen." 

"No?" 

Vera listened with interest. Miss Brent continued serenely: 

"Beatrice Taylor was in service with me. Not a nice girl as I found out too late. I 
was very much deceived in her. She had nice manners and was very clean and 

willing. I was very pleased with her. Of course all that was the sheerest 
hypocrisy! She was a loose girl with no morals. Disgusting! It was some time 

before I found out that she was what they call 'in trouble.'" She paused, her 
delicate nose wrinkling itself in distaste. "It was a great shock to me. Her parents 
were decent folk, too, who had brought her up very strictly. I'm glad to say they 

did not condone her behaviour." 

Vera said, staring at Miss Brent: 

"What happened?" 

"Naturally I did not keep her an hour under my roof. No one shall ever say that I 
condoned immorality." 

Vera said in a lower voice: 

"What happened to her?" 

Miss Brent said: 

"The abandoned creature, not content with having one sin on her conscience, 
committed a still graver sin. She took her own life." 



Vera whispered, horrorstruck: 

"She killed herself?" 

"Yes, she threw herself into the river." 

Vera shivered. 

She stared at the calm delicate profile of Miss Brent. She said: 

"What did you feel like when you knew she'd done that? Weren't you sorry? 
Didn't you blame yourself?" 

Emily Brent drew herself up. 

"I? I had nothing with which to reproach myself." 

Vera said: 

"But if your hardness drove her to it" 

Emily Brent said sharply: 

"Her own action her own sin that was what drove her to it. If she had behaved 
like a decent modest young woman none of this would have happened." 

She turned her face to Vera. There was no selfreproach, no uneasiness in those 

eyes. They were hard and selfrighteous. Emily Brent sat on the summit of Indian 
Island, encased in her own armour of virtue. 

The little elderly spinster was no longer slightly ridiculous to Vera. 

Suddenly she was terrible. 

II 

 DrArmstrong came out of the diningroom and once more came out on the 


terrace. 



The JusticeWargrave was sitting in a chair now, gazing placidly out to sea. 

Lombard and Blore were over to the left, smoking but not talking. 

As before, the doctor hesitated for a moment His eye rested speculatively on Mr. 
 JusticeWargrave. He wanted to consult with some one. He was conscious of the 
JusticeWargrave's acute logical brain. But nevertheless he wavered. Mr.  JusticeWargrave 
might have a good brain but he was an elderly man. At this juncture, DrArmstrong 
felt what was needed was a man of action. 

He made up his mind. 

"Lombard, can I speak to you for a minute?" 

Philip started. 

"Of course." 

The two men left the terrace. They strolled down the slope towards the water. 
When they were out of earshot, DrArmstrong said: 

"I want a consultation." 

Lombard's eyebrows went up. He said: 

"My dear fellow, I've no medical knowledge." 

"No, no, I mean as to the general situation." 

"Oh, that's different." 

DrArmstrong said: 

"Frankly, what do you think of the position?" 


Lombard reflected a minute. Then he said: 



"It's rather suggestive, isn't it?" 

"What are your ideas on the subject of that woman? Do you accept Blore's 
theory?" 

Philip puffed smoke into the air. He said: 

"It's perfectly feasible taken alone." 

"Exactly." 

DrArmstrong's tone sounded relieved. Philip Lombard was no fool. 

The latter went on: 

"That is, accepting the premise that Mr. and Mrs. Rogers have successfully got 
away with murder in their time. And I don't see why they shouldn't. What do you 

think they did exactly? Poisoned the old lady?" 

DrArmstrong said slowly: 

"It might be simpler than that. I asked Rogers this morning what this Miss 
Brady had suffered from. His answer was enlightening. I don't need to go into 
medical details, but in a certain form of cardiac trouble, amyl nitrite is used. 
When an attack comes on an ampoule of amyl nitrite is broken and it is inhaled. 
If amyl nitrite were withheld well, the consequences might easily be fatal." 

Philip Lombard said thoughtfully: 

"As simple as that. It must have been rather tempting." 

The doctor nodded. 

"Yes, no positive action. No arsenic to obtain and administer nothing definite 
just negation! And Rogers hurried through the night to fetch a doctor and they 



both felt confident that no one could ever know." 

"And, even if any one knew, nothing could ever be proved against them," added 
Philip Lombard. 

He frowned suddenly. 

"Of course that explains a good deal." 

DrArmstrong said, puzzled: 

"I beg your pardon." 

Lombard said: 

"I mean it explains Indian Island. There are crimes that cannot be brought home 
to their perpetrators. Instance, the Rogerses'. Another instance, old JusticeWargrave, 
who committed his murder strictly within the law." 

DrArmstrong said sharply: 

"You believe that story?" 

Philip Lombard smiled. 

"Oh, yes, I believe it. JusticeWargrave murdered Edward Seton all right, murdered him 
as surely as if he'd stuck a stiletto through him! But he was clever enough to do 
it from the JusticeWargrave's seat in wig and gown. So in the ordinary way you can't bring 
his 

little crime home to him." 

A sudden flash passed like lightning through DrArmstrong's mind. 

"Murder in Hospital. Murder on the Operating Table. Safe yes, safe as houses!" 
Philip Lombard was saying: 

"Hence Mr. Owen hence Indian Island!" 


DrArmstrong drew a deep breath. 



"Now we're getting down to it. What's the real purpose of getting us all here?" 
Philip Lombard said: 

"What do you think?" 

DrArmstrong said abruptly: 

"Let's go back a minute to this woman's death. What are the possible theories? 
Rogers killed her because he was afraid she would give the show away. Second 
possibility: She lost her nerve and took an easy way out herself." 

Philip Lombard said: 

"Suicide, eh?" 

"What do you say to that?" 

Lombard said: 

"It could have been yes if it hadn't been for Marston's death. Two suicides within 
twelve hours is a little too much to swallow! And if you tell me that 

Anthony Marston, a young bull with no nerves and precious little brains, got the 

wind up over having mowed down a couple of kids and deliberately put himself 

out of the way well, the idea's laughable! And anyway, how did he get hold of 

the stuff? From all I've ever heard, Potassium Cyanide isn't the kind of stuff you 
take about with you in your waistcoat pocket. But that's your line of country." 

DrArmstrong said: 

"Nobody in their senses carries Potassium Cyanide. It might be done by some 
one who was going to take a wasps' nest." 

"The ardent gardener or landowner, in fact? Again, not Anthony Marston. It 



strikes me that Cyanide is going to need a bit of explaining. Either Anthony 
Marston meant to do away with himself before he came here, and therefore came 
prepared or else " 

DrArmstrong prompted him. 

"Or else?" 

Philip Lombard grinned. 

"Why make me say it? When it's on the tip of your own tongue. Anthony 
Marston was murdered, of course." 

Ill 

 DrArmstrong drew a deep breath. 

"And Mrs. Rogers?" 

Lombard said slowly: 

"I could believe in Anthony's suicide (with difficulty) if it weren't for Mrs. 
Rogers. 

I could believe in Mrs. Rogers' suicide (easily) if it weren't for Anthony Marston. 
I can believe that Rogers put his wife out of the way if it were not for the 

unexplained death of Anthony Marston. But what we need is a theory to explain 

two deaths following rapidly on each other." 

DrArmstrong said: 

"I can perhaps give you some help towards that theory." 

And he repeated the facts that Rogers had given him about the disappearance of 
the two little china figures. 



Lombard said: 


"Yes, litde china Indian figures... There were certainly ten last night at dinner. 
And now there are eight, you say?" 

 DrArmstrong recited: 

"Ten little Indian boys going out to dine; 

One went and choked himself and then there were nine. 

"Nine little Indian boys sat up very late; 

One overslept himself and then there were eight." 

The two men looked at each other. Philip Lombard grinned and flung away his 
cigarette. 

"Fits too damned well to be a coincidence! Anthony Marston dies of 
asphyxiation or choking last night after dinner, and Mother Rogers oversleeps 
herself with a 

vengeance." 

"And therefore?" said DrArmstrong. 

Lombard took him up. 

"And therefore another kind of puzzle. The Nigger in the Woodpile! X! Mr. 
Owen! 

U.N. Owen. One Unknown Lunatic at Large!" 

"Ah!" DrArmstrong breathed a sigh of relief. "You agree. But you see what it 
involves? Rogers swore that there was no one but ourselves and he and his wife 

on the island." 

"Rogers is wrong! Or possibly Rogers is lying!" 



DrArmstrong shook his head. 

"I don't think he's lying. The man's scared. He's scared nearly out of his senses." 
Philip Lombard nodded. 

He said: 

"No motor boat this morning. That fits in. Mr. Owen's little arrangements again 
to the fore. Indian Island is to be isolated until Mr. Owen has finished his job." 

DrArmstrong had gone pale. He said: 

"You realize the man must be a raving maniac!" 

Philip Lombard said, and there was a new ring in his voice: 

"There's one thing Mr. Owen didn't realize." 

"What's that?" 

"This island's more or less a bare rock. We shall make short work of searching it. 
We'll soon ferret out U.N. Owen, Esq." 

 DrArmstrong said warningly: 

"He'll be dangerous." 

Philip Lombard laughed. 

"Dangerous? Who's afraid of the big bad wolf? I'll be dangerous when I get hold 
of him!" 

He paused and said: 

"We'd better rope in Blore to help us. He'll be a good man in a pinch. Better not 
tell the women. As for the others, the General's ga ga, I think, and old JusticeWargrave's 
forte is masterly inactivity. The three of us can attend to this job." 



Chapter 8 


Blore was easily roped in. He expressed immediate agreement with their 
arguments. 

"What you've said about those china figures, sir, makes all the difference. That's 
crazy, that is! There's only one thing. You don't think this Owen's idea might be 

to do the job by proxy, as it were?" 

"Explain yourself, man." 

"Well, I mean like this. After the racket last night this young Mr. Marston gets 
the wind up and poisons himself. And Rogers, he gets the wind up too and 
bumps 

off his wife! All according to U.N.O.'s plan." 

DrArmstrong shook his head. He stressed the point about the Cyanide. Blore 
agreed. 

"Yes, I'd forgotten that. Not a natural thing to be carrying about with you. But 
how did it get into his drink, sir?" 

Lombard said: 

"I've been thinking about that. Marston had several drinks that night. Between 
the time he had his last one and the time he finished the one before it, there was 
quite a gap. During that time his glass was lying about on some table or other. I 

think though I can't be sure, it was on the little table near the window. The 

window was open. Somebody could have slipped a dose of the Cyanide into the 

glass." 

Blore said unbelievingly: 

"Without our all seeing him, sir?" 



Lombard said drily: 

"We were all rather concerned elsewhere." 

DrArmstrong said slowly: 

"That's true. We'd all been attacked. We were walking about, moving about the 
room. Arguing, indignant, intent on our own business. I think it could have been 

done..." 

Blore shrugged his shoulders. 

"Fact is, it must have been done! Now then, gentlemen, let's make a start. 
Nobody's got a revolver, by any chance? I suppose that's too much to hope for." 
Lombard said: 

"I've got one." He patted his pocket. 

Blore's eyes opened very wide. He said in an overcasual tone: 

"Always carry that about with you, sir?" 

Lombard said: 

"Usually. I've been in some tight places, you know." 

"Oh," said Blore and added: "Well, you've probably never been in a tighter place 
than you are today! If there's a lunatic hiding on this island, he's probably got a 
young arsenal on him to say nothing of a knife or dagger or two." 

DrArmstrong coughed. 

"You may be wrong there, Blore. Many homicidal lunatics are very quiet, 
unassuming people. Delightful fellows." 

Blore said: 

"I don't feel this one is going to be of that kind,  DrArmstrong." 



II 


The three men started on their tour of the island. It proved unexpectedly simple. 
On the northwest side, towards the coast, the cliffs fell sheer to the sea below, 
their surface unbroken. 

On the rest of the island there were no trees and very little cover. The three men 
worked carefully and methodically, beating up and down from the highest point 

to the water's edge, narrowly scanning the least irregularity in the rock which 

might point to the entrance to a cave. But there were no caves. 

They came at last, skirting the water's edge, to where General Macarthur sat 

looking out to sea. It was very peaceful here with the lap of the waves breaking 

over the rocks. The old man sat very upright, his eyes fixed on the horizon. 

He paid no attention to the approach of the searchers. His oblivion of them made 

one at least faintly uncomfortable. 

Blore thought to himself: 

"'Tisn't natural looks as though he'd gone into a trance or something." 

He cleared his throat and said in a wouldbe conversational tone: 

"Nice peaceful spot you've found for yourself, sir." 

The General frowned. He cast a quick look over his shoulder. He said: 

"There is so little time so little time. I really must insist that no one disturbs me." 
Blore said genially: 

"We won't disturb you. We're just making a tour of the island, so to speak. Just 
wondered, you know, if some one might be hiding on it." 



The General frowned and said: 

"You don't understand you don't understand at all. Please go away." 

Blore retreated. He said, as he joined the other two: 

"He's crazy... It's no good talking to him." 

Lombard asked with some curiosity: 

"What did he say?" 

Blore shrugged his shoulders. 

"Something about there being no time and that he didn't want to be disturbed." 
 DrArmstrong frowned. 

He murmured: 

"I wonder now..." 

Ill 

The search of the island was practically completed. The three men stood on the 
highest point looking over towards the mainland. There were no boats out. The 
wind was freshening. 

Lombard said: 

"No fishing boats out. There's a storm coming. Damned nuisance you can't see 
the village from here. We could signal or do something." 

Blore said: 

"We might light a bonfire tonight." 


Lombard said, frowning: 



"The devil of it is that that's all probably been provided for." 

"In what way, sir?" 

"How do I know? Practical joke, perhaps. We're to be marooned here, no 
attention is to be paid to signals, etc. Possibly the village has been told there's a 
wager on. 

Some damn fool story anyway." 

Blore said dubiously: 

"Think they'd swallow that?" 

Lombard said drily: 

"It's easier of belief than the truth! If the village were told that the island was to 
be isolated until Mr. Unknown Owen had quietly murdered all his guests do you 

think they'd believe that?" 

 DrArmstrong said: 

"There are moments when I can't believe it myself. And yet " 

Philip Lombard, his lips curling back from his teeth, said: 

"And yet that's just it! You've said it, doctor!" 

Blore was gazing down into the water. 

He said: 

"Nobody could have clambered down here, I suppose?" 

DrArmstrong shook his head. 

"I doubt it. It's pretty sheer. And where could he hide?" 


Blore said: 



"There might be a hole in the cliff. If we had a boat now, we could row round the 
island." 

Lombard said: 

"If we had a boat, we'd all be halfway to the mainland by now!" 

"True enough, sir." 

Lombard said suddenly: 

"We can make sure of this cliff. There's only one place where there could be a 
recess just a little to the right below here. If you fellows can get hold of a rope, 
you can let me down to make sure." 

Blore said: 

"Might as well be sure. Though it seems absurd on the face of it! I'll see if I can 
get hold of something." 

He started off briskly down to the house. 

Lombard stared up at the sky. The clouds were beginning to mass themselves 
together. The wind was increasing. 

He shot a sideways look at DrArmstrong. He said: 

"You're very silent, doctor. What are you thinking?" 

DrArmstrong said slowly: 

"I was wondering exactly how mad old Macarthur was..." 

IV 

Vera had been restless all the morning. She had avoided Emily Brent with a kind 
of shuddering aversion. 

Miss Brent herself had taken a chair just round the corner of the house so as to 



be out of the wind. She sat there knitting. 

Every time Vera thought of her she seemed to see a pale drowned face with 
seaweed entangled in the hair... A face that had once been pretty impudently 
pretty perhaps and which was now beyond the reach of pity or terror. 

And Emily Brent, placid and righteous, sat knitting. 

On the main terrace, Mr.  JusticeWargrave sat huddled in a porter's chair. His 
head was poked down well into his neck. 

When Vera looked at him, she saw a man standing in the dock a young man 
with fair hair and blue eyes and a bewildered, frightened face. Edward Seton. 
And in imagination she saw the JusticeWargrave's old hands put the black cap on his head 
and begin to pronounce sentence... 

After a while Vera strolled slowly down to the sea. She walked along towards 
the 

extreme end of the island where an old man sat staring out to the horizon. 
General Macarthur stirred at her approach. His head turned there was a queer 
mixture of questioning and apprehension in his look. It startled her. He stared 
intently at her for a minute or two. 

She thought to herself: 

"How queer. It's almost as though he knew..." 

He said: 


"Ah! it's you! You've come..." 



Vera sat down beside him. She said: 


"Do you like sitting here looking out to sea?" 

He nodded his head gently. 

"Yes," he said. "It's pleasant. It's a good place, I think, to wait." 

"To wait?" said Vera sharply. "What are you waiting for?" 

He said gently: 

"The end. But I think you know that, don't you? It's true, isn't it? We're all 
waiting for the end." 

She said unsteadily: 

"What do you mean?" 

General Macarthur said gravely: 

"None of us are going to leave the island. That's the plan. You know it, of course, 
perfectly. What, perhaps, you can't understand is the relief!" 

Vera said wonderingly: 

"The relief?" 

He said: 

"Yes. Of course, you're very young... you haven't got to that yet. But it does 
come! 

The blessed relief when you know that you've done with it all that you haven't 
got to carry the burden any longer. You'll feel that too some day..." 

Vera said hoarsely: 

"I don't understand you." 



Her fingers worked spasmodically. She felt suddenly afraid of this quiet old 
soldier. 

He said musingly: 

"You see, I loved Leslie. I loved her very much..." 

Vera said questioningly: 

"Was Leslie your wife?" 

"Yes, my wife... I loved her and I was very proud of her. She was so pretty and 
so gay." 

He was silent for a minute or two, then he said: 

"Yes, I loved Leslie. That's why I did it." 

Vera said: 

"You mean " and paused. 

General Macarthur nodded his head gently. 

"It's not much good denying it now not when we're all going to die. I sent 
Richmond to his death. I suppose, in a way, it was murder. Curious. Murder 
and I've always been such a lawabiding man! But it didn't seem like that at the 
time. I had no regrets. 'Serves him damned well right!' that's what I thought. 
But afterwards " 

In a hard voice, Vera said: 

"Well, afterwards?" 

He shook his head vaguely. He looked puzzled and a little distressed. 

"I don't know. I don't know. It was all different, you see. I don't know if Leslie 



ever guessed... I don't think so. But you see, I didn't know about her any more. 
She'd gone far away where I couldn't reach her. And then she died and I was 
alone..." 

Vera said: 

"Alone alone " and the echo of her voice came back to her from the rocks. 
General Macarthur said: 

"You'll be glad, too, when the end comes." 

Vera got up. She said sharply: 

"I don't know what you mean!" 

He said: 

"I know, my child, I know..." 

"You don't. You don't understand at all..." 

General Macarthur looked out to sea again. He seemed unconscious of her 
presence behind him. 

He said very gently and softly: 

"Leslie...?" 

V 

When Blore returned from the house with a rope coiled over his arm, he found 
DrArmstrong where he had left him staring down into the depths. 

Blore said breathlessly: 


"Where's Mr. Lombard?" 



DrArmstrong said carelessly: 

"Gone to test some theory or other. He'll be back in a minute. Look here, Blore, 
I'm worried." 

"I should say we were all worried." 

The doctor waved an impatient hand. 

"Of course of course. I don't mean it that way. I'm thinking of old Macarthur." 
"What about him, sir?" 

 DrArmstrong said grimly: 

"What we're looking for is a madman. What price Macarthur?" 

Blore said incredulously: 

"You mean he's homicidal?" 

DrArmstrong said doubtfully: 

"I shouldn't have said so. Not for a minute. But of course I'm not a specialist in 
mental diseases. I haven't really had any conversation with him I haven't studied 
him from that point of view." 

Blore said doubtfully: 

"Ga ga, yes! But I wouldn't have said " 

DrArmstrong cut in with a slight effort as of a man who pulls himself together. 
"You're probably right! Damn it all, there must be some one hiding on the island! 
Ah! here comes Lombard." 

They fastened the rope carefully. 


Lombard said: 



"I'll help myself all I can. Keep a lookout for a sudden strain on the rope," 
After a minute or two, while they stood together watching Lombard's progress, 
Blore said: 

"Climbs like a cat, doesn't he?" 

There was something odd in his voice. 

 DrArmstrong said: 

"I should think he must have done some mountaineering in his time." 

"Maybe." 

There was a silence and the exinspector said: 

"Funny sort of cove altogether. D'you know what I think?" 

"What?" 

"He's a wrong ’un!" 

DrArmstrong said doubtfully: 

"In what way?" 

Blore grunted. Then he said: 

"I don't know exactly. But I wouldn't trust him a yard." 

 DrArmstrong said; 

"I suppose he's led an adventurous life." 

Blore said: 

"I bet some of his adventures have had to be kept pretty dark." He paused and 
then went on: "Did you happen to bring a revolver along with you, doctor?" 



DrArmstrong stared. 

"Me? Good Lord, no. Why should I?" 

Blore said: 

"Why did Mr. Lombard?" 

DrArmstrong said doubtfully: 

"I suppose habit." 

Blore snorted. 

A sudden pull came on the rope. For some moments they had their hands full. 
Presently, when the strain relaxed, Blore said: 

"There are habits and habits! Mr. Lombard takes a revolver to outoftheway 

places, right enough, and a primus and a sleeping bag and a supply of bug 

powder, no doubt! But habit wouldn't make him bring the whole outfit down 
here! It's only in books people carry revolvers around as a matter of course," 

 DrArmstrong shook his head perplexedly. 

They leaned over and watched Lombard's progress. His search was thorough and 
they could see at once that it was futile. Presently he came up over the edge of 
the cliff. He wiped the perspiration from his forehead. 

"Well," he said. "We're up against it. It's the house or nowhere." 

VI 

The house was easily searched. They went through the few outbuildings first and 
then turned their attention to the building itself. Mrs. Rogers' yard measure 



discovered in the kitchen dresser assisted them. But there were no hidden spaces 

left unaccounted for. Everything was plain and straightforward, a modern 
structure devoid of concealments. They went through the ground floor first. As 

they mounted to the bedroom floor, they saw through the landing window 
Rogers 

carrying out a tray of cocktails to the terrace. 

Philip Lombard said lightly: 

"Wonderful animal, the good servant. Carries on with an impassive 
countenance." 

DrArmstrong said appreciatively: 

"Rogers is a firstclass butler, I'll say that for him!" 

Blore said: 

"His wife was a pretty good cook, too. That dinner last night " 

They turned in to the first bedroom. 

Five minutes later they faced each other on the landing. No one hiding no 
possible hidingplace. 

Blore said: 

"There's a little stair here." 

 DrArmstrong said: 

"It leads up to the servants' room." 

Blore said: 

"There must be a place under the roof for cisterns, water tank, etc. It's the best 
chance and the only one!" 



And it was then, as they stood there, that they heard the sound from above. A 
soft furtive footfall overhead. 

They all heard it. DrArmstrong grasped Blore's arm. Lombard held up an 
admonitory finger. 

"Quiet listen." 

It came again some one moving softly, furtively, overhead. 

DrArmstrong whispered: 

"He's actually in the bedroom itself. The room where Mrs. Rogers' body is." 
Blore whispered back: 

"Of course! Best hidingplace he could have chosen! Nobody likely to go there. 
Now then quiet as you can." 

They crept stealthily upstairs. 

On the little landing outside the door of the bedroom they paused again. Yes, 
some one was in the room. There was a faint creak from within. 

Blore whispered: 

"Now." 

He flung open the door and rushed in, the other two close behind him. 

Then all three stopped dead. 

Rogers was in the room, his hands full of garments. 

VII 


Blore recovered himself first. He said: 



"Sorry er Rogers. Heard some one moving about in here, and thought well " 

He stopped. 

Rogers said: 

"I'm sorry, gentlemen. I was just moving my things. I take it there will be no 
objection if I take one of the vacant guest chambers on the floor below? The 

smallest room." 

It was to DrArmstrong that he spoke, and DrArmstrong replied: 

"Of course. Of course. Get on with it." 

He avoided looking at the sheeted figure lying on the bed. 

Rogers said: 

"Thank you, sir." 

He went out of the room with his arm full of belongings and went down the 
stairs 

to the floor below. 

DrArmstrong moved over to the bed and, lifting the sheet, looked down on the 
peaceful face of the dead woman. There was no fear there now. Just emptiness. 
DrArmstrong said: 

"Wish I'd got my stuff here. I'd like to know what drug it was." 

Then he turned to the other two. 

"Let's get finished. I feel it in my bones we're not going to find anything." 
Blore was wrestling with the bolts of a low manhole. 


He said: 



"That chap moves damned quietly. A minute or two ago we saw him in the 
garden. None of us heard him come upstairs." 

Lombard said: 

"I suppose that's why we assumed it must be a stranger moving about up here." 
Blore disappeared into a cavernous darkness. Lombard pulled a torch from his 
pocket and followed. 

Five minutes later three men stood on an upper landing and looked at each 
other. They were dirty and festooned with cobwebs and their faces were grim. 
There was no one on the island but their eight selves. 



Chapter 9 

Lombard said slowly: 


"So we've been wrong wrong all along! Built up a nightmare of superstition and 
fantasy all because of the coincidence of two deaths!" 

DrArmstrong said gravely: 

"And yet, you know, the argument holds. Hang it all, I'm a doctor, I know 
something about suicides. Anthony Marston wasn't a suicidal type." 

Lombard said doubtfully: 

"It couldn't, I suppose, have been an accident?" 

Blore snorted, unconvinced. 

"Damned queer sort of accident," he grunted. 

There was a pause, then Blore said: 

"About the woman " and stopped. 

"Mrs. Rogers?" 

"Yes. It's possible, isn't it, that that might have been an accident?" 

Philip Lombard said: 

"An accident? In what way?" 

Blore looked slightly embarrassed. His redbrick face grew a little deeper in hue. 
He said, almost blurting out the words: 

"Look here, doctor, you did give her some dope, you know." 


DrArmstrong stared at him. 



"Dope? What do you mean?" 

"Last night. You said yourself you'd give her something to make her sleep." 

"Oh, that, yes. A harmless sedative." 

"What was it exactly?" 

"I gave her a mild dose of trional. A perfectly harmless preparation." 

Blore grew redder still. He said: 

"Look here not to mince matters you didn't give her an overdose, did you?" 

 DrArmstrong said angrily: 

"I don't know what you mean." 

Blore said: 

"It's possible, isn't it, that you may have made a mistake? These things do 
happen once in awhile." 

DrArmstrong said sharply: 

"I did nothing of the sort. The suggestion is ridiculous," He stopped and added in 
a cold biting tone: "Or do you suggest that I gave her an overdose on purpose?" 

Philip Lombard said quickly: 

"Look here, you two, got to keep our heads. Don't let's start slinging accusations 
about." 

Blore said sullenly: 

"I only suggested the doctor had made a mistake." 

 DrArmstrong smiled with an effort. He said, showing his teeth in a somewhat 


mirthless smile: 



"Doctors can't afford to make mistakes of that kind, my friend." 

Blore said deliberately: 

"It wouldn't be the first you've made if that gramophone record is to be 
believed!" 

DrArmstrong went white. Philip Lombard said quickly and angrily to Blore: 

"What's the sense of making yourself offensive? We're all in the same boat. 
We've got to pull together. What about your own pretty little spot of perjury?" 

Blore took a step forward, his hands clenched. He said in a thick voice: 

"Perjury be damned! That's a foul lie! You may try and shut me up, Mr. 
Lombard, but there's things I want to know and one of them is about you!" 

Lombard's eyebrows rose. 

"About me?" 

"Yes. I want to know why you brought a revolver down here on a pleasant social 
visit?" 

Lombard said: 

"You do, do you?" 

"Yes, I do, Mr. Lombard." 

Lombard said unexpectedly: 

"You know, Blore, you're not nearly such a fool as you look." 

"That's as may be. What about that revolver?" 

Lombard smiled. 

"I brought it because I expected to run into a spot of trouble." 


Blore said suspiciously: 



"You didn't tell us that last night." 

Lombard shook his head. 

"You were holding out on us?" Blore persisted. 

"In a way, yes," said Lombard. 

"Well, come on, out with it." 

Lombard said slowly: 

"I allowed you all to think that I was asked here in the same way as most of the 
others, That's not quite true. As a matter of fact I was approached by a little 

Jewboy Morris his name was. He offered me a hundred guineas to come down 

here and keep my eyes open said I'd got a reputation for being a good man in a 

tight place." 

"Well?" Blore prompted impatiently. 

Lombard said with a grin: 

"That's all." 

 DrArmstrong said: 

"But surely he told you more than that?" 

"Oh, no, he didn't. Just shut up like a clam. I could take it or leave it those were 
his words. I was hard up. I took it." Blore looked unconvinced. He said: 

"Why didn't you tell us all this last night?" 

"My dear man " Lombard shrugged eloquent shoulders. "How was I to know that 
last night wasn't exactly the eventuality I was here to cope with? I lay low and 


told a noncommittal story." 



 DrArmstrong said shrewdly: 

"But now you think differently?" 

Lombard's face changed. It darkened and hardened. He said: 

"Yes, I believe now that I'm in the same boat as the rest of you. That hundred 
guineas was just Mr. Owen's little bit of cheese to get me into the trap along with 
the rest of you." 

He said slowly: 

"For we are in a trap I'll take my oath on that! Mrs. Rogers' death! Tony 
Marston's! The disappearing Indian boys on the dinnertable! Oh, yes, Mr. 

Owen's hand is plainly to be seen but where the devil is Mr. Owen himself?" 
Downstairs the gong pealed a solemn call to lunch. 

II 

Rogers was standing by the diningroom door. As the three men descended the 

stairs he moved a step or two forward. He said in a low anxious voice: 

"I hope lunch will be satisfactory. There is cold ham and cold tongue, and I've 
boiled some potatoes. And there's cheese and biscuits and some tinned fruits." 

Lombard said: 

"Sounds all right. Stores are holding out, then?" 

"There is plenty of food, sir of a tinned variety. The larder is very well stocked. 

A necessity, that, I should say, sir, on an island where one may be cut off from 
the mainland for a considerable period." 


Lombard nodded. 



Rogers murmured as he followed the three men into the diningroom: 

"It wormes me that Fred Narracott hasn't been over today. It's peculiarly 
unfortunate, as you might say," 

"Yes," said Lombard, "peculiarly unfortunate describes it very well." 

Miss Brent came into the room. She had just dropped a ball of wool and was 
carefully rewinding the end of it. 

As she took her seat at table she remarked: 

"The weather is changing. The wind is quite strong and there are white horses on 
the sea." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave came in. He walked with a slow measured tread. He darted 

quick looks from under his bushy eyebrows at the other occupants of the 
diningroom. He said: 

"You have had an active morning." 

There was a faint malicious pleasure in his voice. 

Vera Claythorne hurried in. She was a little out of breath. 

She said quickly: 

"I hope you didn't wait for me. Am I late?" 

Emily Brent said: 

"You're not the last. The General isn't here yet." 

They sat round the table. 

Rogers addressed Miss Brent: 

"Will you begin, Madam, or will you wait?" 



Vera said: 


"General Macarthur is sitting right down by the sea. I don't expect he would hear 
the gong there and anyway" she hesitated "he's a little vague today, I think." 

Rogers said quickly: 

"I will go down and inform him luncheon is ready." 

 DrArmstrong jumped up. 

"I'll go," he said. "You others start lunch." 

He left the room. Behind him he heard Rogers' voice. 

"Will you take cold tongue or cold ham, Madam?" 

Ill 

The five people sitting round the table seemed to find conversation difficult. 
Outside sudden gusts of wind came up and died away. 

Vera shivered a little and said: 

"There is a storm coming." 

Blore made a contribution to the discourse. He said conversationally: 

"There was an old fellow in the train from Plymouth yesterday. He kept saying a 
storm was coming. Wonderful how they know weather, these old salts." 

Rogers went round the table collecting the meat plates. 

Suddenly, with the plates held in his hands, he stopped. He said in an odd scared 
voice: 

"There's somebody running..." 

They could all hear it running feet along the terrace. 



In that minute, they knew knew without being told... 

As by common accord, they all rose to their feet. They stood looking towards the 
door. 

 DrArmstrong appeared, his breath coming fast. 

He said: 

"General Macarthur " 

"Dead!" The voice burst from Vera explosively. 

DrArmstrong said: 

"Yes, he's dead..." 

There was a pause a long pause. 

Seven people looked at each other and could find no words to say. 

IV 

The storm broke just as the old man's body was borne in through the door. 

The others were standing in the hall. 

There was a sudden hiss and roar as the rain came down. 

As Blore and DrArmstrong passed up the stairs with their burden, Vera Claythorne 

turned suddenly and went into the deserted diningroom. 

It was as they had left it. The sweet course stood ready on the sideboard 
untasted, 

Vera went up to the table. She was there a minute or two later when Rogers 
came softly into the room. 



He started when he saw her. Then his eyes asked a question. 

He said: 

"Oh, Miss, 11 just came to see..." 

In a loud harsh voice that surprised herself Vera said: 

"You're quite right, Rogers. Look for yourself. There are only seven..." 

V 

General Macarthur had been laid on his bed. 

After making a last examination DrArmstrong left the room and came downstairs. 
He found the others assembled in the drawingroom. 

Miss Brent was knitting. Vera Claythorne was standing by the window looking 
out at the hissing rain, Blore was sitting squarely in a chair, his hands on his 
knees. Lombard was walking restlessly up and down. At the far end of the room 
Mr.  JusticeWargrave was sitting in a grandfather chair. His eyes were half 
closed. 

They opened as the doctor came into the room. He said in a clear penetrating 
voice: 

"Well, doctor?" 

DrArmstrong was very pale. He said: 

"No question of heart failure or anything like that. Macarthur was hit with a life 
preserver or some such thing on the back of the head." 

A little murmur went round, but the clear voice of the JusticeWargrave was raised once 
more. 



"Did you find the actual weapon used?" 

"No." 

"Nevertheless you are sure of your facts?" 

"Iam quite sure." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave said quietly: 

"We know now exactly where we are." 

There was no doubt now who was in charge of the situation. This morning 
JusticeWargrave had sat huddled in his chair on the terrace refraining from any overt 

activity. Now he assumed command with the ease born of a long habit of 
authority. He definitely presided over the court. 

Clearing his throat, he once more spoke. 

"This morning, gentlemen, whilst I was sitting on the terrace. I was an observer 
of your activities. There could be little doubt of your purpose. You were 
searching the island for an unknown murderer?" 

"Quite right, sir," said Philip Lombard. 

The JusticeWargrave went on. 

"You had come, doubtless, to the same conclusion that I had namely that the 
deaths of Anthony Marston and Mrs. Rogers were neither accidental nor were 

they suicides. No doubt you also reached a certain conclusion as to the purpose 
of Mr. Owen in enticing us to this island?" 

Blore said hoarsely: 

"He's a madman! A loony." 

The JusticeWargrave coughed. 

"That almost certainly. But it hardly affects the issue. Our main preoccupation is 



this to save our lives." 


DrArmstrong said in a trembling voice: 

"There's no one on the island, I tell you. No one!" 

The JusticeWargrave stroked his jaw. 

He said gently: 

"In the sense you mean, no. I came to that conclusion early this morning. I could 
have told you that your search would be fruitless. Nevertheless I am strongly of 

the opinion that 'Mr. Owen' (to give him the name he himself has adopted) is on 

the island. Very much so. Given the scheme in question which is neither more 

nor less than the execution of justice upon certain individuals for offences which 
the law cannot touch, there is only one way in which that scheme could be 

accomplished. Mr. Owen could only come to the island in one way. 

"It is perfectly clear. Mr. Owen is one of us..." 

VI 

"Oh, no, no, no..." 

It was Vera who burst out almost in a moan. The JusticeWargrave turned a keen eye on 
her. 

He said: 

"My dear young lady, this is no time for refusing to look facts in the face. We are 
all in grave danger. One of us is U.N. Owen. And we do not know which of us. 
Of 

the ten people who came to this island three are definitely cleared. Anthony 
Marston, Mrs. Rogers, and General Macarthur have gone beyond suspicion. 



There are seven of us left. Of those seven, one is, if I may so express myself, a 
bogus little Indian boy." 

He paused and looked round. 

"Do I take it that you all agree?" 

DrArmstrong said: 

"It's fantastic but I suppose you're right." 

Blore said: 

"Not a doubt of it. And if you ask me, I've a very good idea " 

A quick gesture of Mr.  JusticeWargrave's hand stopped him. The JusticeWargrave said 
quietly: 

"We will come to that presently. At the moment all I wish to establish is that we 
are in agreement on the facts." 

Emily Brent, still knitting, said: 

"Your argument seems logical. I agree that one of us is possessed by a devil." 
Vera murmured: 

"I can't believe it... I can't..." 

JusticeWargrave said: 

"Lombard?" 

"I agree, sir, absolutely." 

The JusticeWargrave nodded his head in a satisfied manner. He said: 

"Now let us examine the evidence. To begin with, is there any reason for 
suspecting one particular person? Mr. Blore, you have, I think, something to 
say." 



Blore was breathing hard. He said: 

"Lombard's got a revolver. He didn't tell the truth last night. He admits it." 

Philip Lombard smiled scornfully. 

He said: 

"I suppose I'd better explain again." 

He did so, telling the story briefly and succinctly. 

Blore said sharply: 

"What's to prove it? There's nothing to corroborate your story." 

The JusticeWargrave coughed. 

"Unfortunately," he said, "we are all in that position. There is only our own word 
to go upon." 

He leaned forward. 

"You have none of you yet grasped what a very peculiar situation this is. To my 
mind there is only one course of procedure to adopt. Is there any one whom we 

can definitely eliminate from suspicion on the evidence which is in our 
possession?" 

 DrArmstrong said quickly: 

"I am a wellknown professional man. The mere idea that I can be suspected of " 

Again a gesture of the JusticeWargrave's hand arrested a speaker before he finished his 

speech. Mr.  JusticeWargrave said in his small clear voice: 

"I, too, am a wellknown person! But, my dear sir, that proves less than nothing! 

Doctors have gone mad before now. JusticeWargraves have gone mad. So," he added, 
looking at Blore, "have policemen!" 



Lombard said: 


"At any rate, I suppose you'll leave the women out of it." 

The JusticeWargrave's eyebrows rose. He said in the famous "acid" tone that Counsel knew 
so well: 

"Do I understand you to assert that women are not subject to homicidal mania?" 
Lombard said irritably: 

"Of course not. But all the same, it hardly seems possible " 

He stopped. Mr.  JusticeWargrave still in the same thin sour voice addressed 
DrArmstrong. 

"I take it,  DrArmstrong, that a woman would have been physically capable of 
striking the blow that killed poor Macarthur?" 

The doctor said calmly: 

"Perfectly capable given a suitable instrument, such as a rubber truncheon or 
cosh." 

"It would require no undue exertion of force?" 

"Not at all." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave wriggled his tortoiselike neck. He said: 

"The other two deaths have resulted from the administration of drugs. That, no 
one will dispute, is easily compassed by a person of the smallest physical 
strength." 

Vera cried angrily: 

"I think you're mad!" 

His eyes turned slowly till they rested on her. It was the dispassionate stare of a 
man well used to weighing humanity in the balance. She thought: 



"He's just seeing me as a as a specimen. And" the thought came to her with real 
surprise "he doesn't like me much!" 

In measured tones the JusticeWargrave was saying: 

"My dear young lady, do try and restrain your feelings. I am not accusing you." 

He bowed to Miss Brent. "I hope, Miss Brent, that you are not offended by my 

insistence that all of us are equally under suspicion?" 

Emily Brent was knitting. She did not look up. In a cold voice she said: 

"The idea that I should be accused of taking a fellow creature's life not to speak 
of the lives of three fellow creatures is, of course, quite absurd to any one who 
knows anything of my character. But I quite appreciate the fact that we are all 

strangers to one another and that in those circumstances, nobody can be 
exonerated without the fullest proof. There is, as I have said, a devil amongst 
us." 

The JusticeWargrave said: 

"Then we are agreed. There can be no elimination on the ground of character or 
position alone." 

Lombard said: 

"What about Rogers?" 

The JusticeWargrave looked at him unthinkingly. 

"What about him?" 

Lombard said: 

"Well, to my mind, Rogers seems pretty well ruled out." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave said: 

"Indeed, and on what grounds?" 



Lombard said: 


"He hasn't got the brains for one thing. And for another his wife was one of the 
victims." 

The JusticeWargrave's heavy eyebrows rose once more. He said: 

"In my time, young man, several people have come before me accused of the 
murders of their wives and have been found guilty." 

"Oh! I agree. Wife murder is perfectly possible almost natural, let's say! But not 
this particular kind! I can believe in Rogers killing his wife because he was 

scared of her breaking down and giving him away, or because he'd taken a 
dislike 

to her, or because he wanted to link up with some nice little bit rather less long in 
the tooth. But I can't see him as the lunatic Mr. Owen dealing out crazy justice 
and starting on his own wife for a crime they both committed." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave said: 

"You are assuming hearsay to be evidence. We do not know that Rogers and his 
wife conspired to murder their employer. That may have been a false statement, 
made so that Rogers should appear to be in the same position as ourselves. Mrs. 
Rogers' terror last night may have been due to the fact that she realized her 
husband was mentally unhinged." 

Lombard said: 

"Well, have it your own way, U.N. Owen is one of us. No exceptions allowed. 

We all qualify." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave said: 

"My point is that there can be no exceptions allowed on the score of character, 



position, or probability. What we must now examine is the possibility of 
eliminating one or more persons on the facts. To put it simply, is there among us 

one or more persons who could not possibly have administered either Cyanide to 

Anthony Marston, or an overdose of sleeping draught to Mrs. Rogers, and who 

had no opportunity of striking the blow that killed General Macarthur?" 

Blore's rather heavy face lit up. He leant forward. 

"Now you're talking, sir!" he said. "That's the stuff! Let's go into it. As regards 
young Marston I don't think there's anything to be done. It's already been 
suggested that some one from outside slipped something into the dregs of his 

glass before he refilled it for the last time. A person actually in the room could 
have done that even more easily. I can't remember if Rogers was in the room, but 

any of the rest of us could certainly have done it." 

He paused, then went on. 

"Now take the woman Rogers. The people who stand out there are her husband 
and the doctor. Either of them could have done it as easy as winking " 

DrArmstrong sprang to his feet. He was trembling. 

"I protest This is absolutely uncalled for! I swear that the dose I gave the woman 
was perfectly " 

" DrArmstrong." 

The small sour voice was compelling. The doctor stopped with a jerk in the 

middle of his sentence. The small cold voice went on. 

"Your indignation is very natural. Nevertheless you must admit that the facts 
have got to be faced. Either you or Rogers could have administered a fatal dose 

with the greatest ease. Let us now consider the position of the other people 



present. What chance had I, had Inspector Blore, had Miss Brent, had Miss 
Claythorne, had Mr. Lombard of administering poison? Can any one of us be 
completely and entirely eliminated?" He paused. "I think not." 

Vera said angrily: 

"I was nowhere near the woman! All of you can swear to that." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave waited a minute, then he said: 

"As far as my memory serves me the facts were these will any one please correct 
me if I make a misstatement? Mrs. Rogers was lifted onto the sofa by Anthony 

Marston and Mr. Lombard and  DrArmstrong went to her. He sent Rogers for 

brandy. There was then a question raised as to where the voice we had just heard 

had come from. We all went into the next room with the exception of Miss Brent 

who remained in this room alone with the unconscious woman." 

A spot of colour came into Emily Brent's cheeks. She stopped knitting. She said: 

"This is outrageous!" 

The remorseless small voice went on. 

"When we returned to this room, you, Miss Brent, were bending over the woman 
on the sofa." 

Emily Brent said: 

"Is common humanity a criminal offence?" 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave said: 

"I am only establishing facts. Rogers then entered the room with the brandy 



which, of course, he could quite well have doctored before entering the room. 
The 


brandy was administered to the woman and shortly afterwards her husband and 
 DrArmstrong assisted her up to bed where  DrArmstrong gave her a sedative." 
Blore said: 

"That's what happened. Absolutely. And that lets out the JusticeWargrave, Mr. Lombard, 
myself and Miss Claythorne." 

His voice was loud and jubilant. Mr.  JusticeWargrave, bringing a cold eye to 
bear upon him, murmured: 

"Ah, but does it? We must take into account every possible eventuality." 

Blore stared. He said: 

"I don't get you." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave said: 

"Upstairs in her room, Mrs. Rogers is lying in bed. The sedative that the doctor 
has given her begins to take effect. She is vaguely sleepy and acquiescent. 

Supposing that at that moment there is a tap on the door and some one enters 

bringing her, shall we say, a tablet, or a draught, with the message that 'the 

doctor says you're to take this.' Do you imagine for one minute that she would 
not have swallowed it obediently without thinking twice about it?" 

There was a silence. Blore shifted his feet and frowned. Philip Lombard said: 

"I don't believe in that story for a minute. Besides none of us left this room for 
hours afterwards. There was Marston's death and all the rest of it." 


The JusticeWargrave said: 



"Some one could have left his or her bedroom later." 


Lombard objected: 

"But then Rogers would have been up there." 

 DrArmstrong stirred. 

"No," he said. "Rogers went downstairs to clear up in the diningroom and pantry. 
Any one could have gone up to the woman's bedroom then without being seen." 
Emily Brent said: 

"Surely, doctor, the woman would have been fast asleep by then under the 
influence of the drug you had administered?" 

"In all likelihood, yes. But it is not a certainty. Until you have prescribed for a 
patient more than once you cannot tell their reaction to different drugs. There is, 
sometimes, a considerable period before a sedative takes effect. It depends on 
the personal idiosyncrasy of the patient towards that particular drug." 

Lombard said: 

"Of course you would say that, doctor. Suits your book eh?" 

Again DrArmstrong's face darkened with anger. 

But again that passionless cold little voice stopped the words on his lips. 

"No good result can come from recrimination. Facts are what we have to deal 

with. It is established, I think, that there is a possibility of such a thing as I have 
outlined occurring. I agree that its probability value is not high; though there 

again, it depends on who that person might have been. The appearance of Miss 
Brent or of Miss Claythorne on such an errand would have occasioned no 
surprise in the patient's mind. I agree that the appearance of myself, or of Mr. 

Blore, or of Mr. Lombard could have been, to say the least of it, unusual, but I 



still think the visit would have been received without the awakening of any real 
suspicion." 

Blore said: 

"And that gets us where?" 

VII 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave, stroking his lip and looking quite passionless and 
inhuman, said: 

"We have now dealt with the second killing, and have established the fact that no 
one of us can be completely exonerated from suspicion." 

He paused and went on. 

"We come now to the death of General Macarthur. That took place this morning. 

I will ask any one who considers that he or she has an alibi to state it in so many 
words. I myself will state at once that I have no valid alibi. I spent the morning 
sitting on the terrace and meditating on the singular position in which we all find 
ourselves. 

"I sat on that chair on the terrace for the whole morning until the gong went, but 
there were, I should imagine, several periods during the morning when I was 

quite unobserved and during which it would have been possible for me to walk 

down to the sea, kill the General, and return to my chair. There is only my word 
for the fact that I never left the terrace. In the circumstances that is not enough. 

There must be proof." 

Blore said: 

"I was with Mr. Lombard and  DrArmstrong all the morning. They'll bear me 
out." 



 DrArmstrong said: 

"You went to the house for a rope." 

Blore said: 

"Of course, I did. Went straight there and straight back. You know I did." 
DrArmstrong said: 

"You were a long time..." 

Blore turned crimson. 

He said: 

"What the hell do you mean by that,  DrArmstrong?" 

DrArmstrong repeated: 

"I only said you were a long time." 

"Had to find it, didn't I? Can't lay your hands on a coil of rope all in a minute." 
Mr.  JusticeWargrave said: 

"During Inspector Blore's absence, were you two gentlemen together?" 
DrArmstrong said hotly: 

"Certainly. That is, Lombard went off for a few minutes. I remained where I 
was." 

Lombard said with a smile: 

"I wanted to test the possibilities of heliographing to the mainland. Wanted to 
find the best spot. I was only absent a minute or two." 


DrArmstrong nodded. He said: 



"That's right. Not long enough to do a murder, I assure you." 

The JusticeWargrave said: 

"Did either of you two glance at your watches?" 

"Well, no." 

Philip Lombard said: 

"I wasn't wearing one." 

The JusticeWargrave said evenly: 

"A minute or two is a vague expression." 

He turned his head to the upright figure with the knitting lying on her lap. 

"Miss Brent?" 

Emily Brent said: 

"I took a walk with Miss Claythorne up to the top of the island. Afterwards I sat 
on the terrace in the sun." 

The JusticeWargrave said: 

"I don't think I noticed you there." 

"No, I was round the corner of the house to the east. It was out of the wind 
there." 

"And you sat there till lunch time?" 

"Yes." 

"Miss Claythorne?" 


Vera answered readily and clearly. 



"I was with Miss Brent early this morning. After that I wandered about a bit. 
Then I went down and talked to General Macarthur." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave interrupted. He said: 

"What time was that?" 

Vera for the first time was vague. She said; 

"I don't know. About an hour before lunch, I think or it might have been less." 
Blore asked: 

"Was it after we'd spoken to him or before?" 

Vera said: 

"I don't know. He he was very queer." 

She shivered. 

"In what way was he queer?" the JusticeWargrave wanted to know. 

Vera said in a low voice: 

"He said we were all going to die he said he was waiting for the end. He he 
frightened me..." 

The JusticeWargrave nodded. He said: 

"What did you do next?" 

"I went back to the house. Then, just before lunch, I went out again and up 
behind the house. I've been terribly restless all day." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave stroked his chin. He said: 

"There remains Rogers. Though I doubt if his evidence will add anything to our 
sum of knowledge." 



Rogers, summoned before the court, had very little to tell. He had been busy all 
the morning about household duties and with the preparation of lunch. He had 
taken cocktails onto the terrace before lunch and had then gone up to remove his 
things from the attic to another room. He had not looked out of the window 
during the morning and had seen nothing that could have any bearing upon the 
death of General Macarthur. He would swear definitely that there had been eight 
china figures upon the diningtable when he laid the table for lunch. 

At the conclusion of Rogers' evidence there was a pause. Mr.  JusticeWargrave 
cleared his throat. 

Lombard murmured to Vera Claythorne: 

"The summing up will now take place!" 

The JusticeWargrave said: 

"We have inquired into the circumstances of these three deaths to the best of our 
ability. Whilst probability in some cases is against certain people being 
implicated, yet we cannot say definitely that any one person can be considered as 

cleared of all complicity. I reiterate my positive belief that of the seven persons 
assembled in this room one is a dangerous and probably insane criminal. There 
is 

no evidence before us as to who that person is. All we can do at the present 

juncture is to consider what measures we can take for communicating with the 

mainland for help, and in the event of help being delayed (as is only too possible 

given the state of the weather) what measures we must adopt to ensure our 
safety. 



"I would ask you all to consider this carefully and to give me any suggestions 
that may occur to you. In the meantime I warn everybody to be upon his or her 
guard. 

So far the murderer has had an easy task, since his victims have been 
unsuspicious. From now on, it is our task to suspect each and every one amongst 

us. Forewarned is forearmed. Take no risks and be alert to danger. That is all." 

Philip Lombard murmured beneath his breath: 

"The court will now adjourn..." 



Chapter 10 


"Do you believe it?" Vera asked. 

She and Philip Lombard sat on the windowsill of the livingroom. Outside the 
rain poured down and the wind howled in great shuddering gusts against the 
windowpanes. 

Philip Lombard cocked his head slightly on one side before answering. Then he 
said: 

"You mean, do I believe that old JusticeWargrave is right when he says it's one of us?" 
"Yes." 

Philip Lombard said slowly: 

"It's difficult to say. Logically, you know, he's right, and yet " 

Vera took the words out of his mouth. 

"And yet it seems so incredible!" 

Philip Lombard made a grimace. 

"The whole thing's incredible! But after Macarthur's death there's no more doubt 
as to one thing. There's no question now of accidents or suicides. It's definitely 
murder. Three murders up to date." 

Vera shivered. She said: 

"It's like some awful dream. I keep feeling that things like this can't happen!" 

He said with understanding: 

"I know. Presently a tap will come on the door, and early morning tea will be 



brought in." 

Vera said: 

"Oh, how I wish that could happen!" 

Philip Lombard said gravely: 

"Yes, but it won't! We're all in the dream! And we've got to be pretty much upon 
our guard from now on." 

Vera said, lowering her voice: 

"If if it is one of them which do you think it is?" 

Philip Lombard grinned suddenly. He said: 

"I take it you are excepting our two selves? Well, that's all right. I know very 
well that I'm not the murderer, and I don't fancy that there's anything insane 
about 

you, Vera. You strike me as being one of the sanest and most levelheaded girls 
I've come across. I'd stake my reputation on your sanity." 

With a slightly wry smile, Vera said: 

"Thank you." 

He said: 

"Come now, Miss Vera Claythorne, aren't you going to return the compliment?" 
Vera hesitated a minute, then she said: 

"You've admitted, you know, that you don't hold human life particularly sacred, 
but all the same I can't see you as as the man who dictated that gramophone 

record." 


Lombard said: 



"Quite right. If I were to commit one or more murders it would be solely for 
what I could get out of them. This mass clearance isn't my line of country. Good, 
then 

we'll eliminate ourselves and concentrate on our five fellow prisoners. Which of 

them is U.N. Owen? Well, at a guess, and with absolutely nothing to go upon, I'd 
plump for JusticeWargrave!" 

"Oh!" Vera sounded surprised. She thought a minute or two and then said, 
"Why?" 

"Hard to say exactly. But to begin with, he's an old man and he's been presiding 
over courts of law for years. That is to say, he's played God Almighty for a good 

many months every year. That must go to a man's head eventually. He gets to 

see himself as all powerful, as holding the power of life and death and it's 

possible that his brain might snap and he might want to go one step farther and 

be Executioner and JusticeWargrave Extraordinary." 

Vera said slowly: 

"Yes, I suppose that's possible..." 

Lombard said: 

"Who do you plump for?" 

Without any hesitation Vera answered: 

" DrArmstrong." 

Lombard gave a low whistle. 

"The doctor, eh? You know, I should have put him last of all." 


Vera shook her head. 



"Oh, no! Two of the deaths have been poison. That rather points to a doctor. And 
then you can't get over the fact that the only thing we are absolutely certain Mrs. 

Rogers had was the sleeping draught that he gave her." 

Lombard admitted: 

"Yes, that's true." 

Vera persisted: 

"If a doctor went mad, it would be a long time before any one suspected. And 
doctors overwork and have a lot of strain." 

Philip Lombard said: 

"Yes but I doubt if he could have killed Macarthur. He wouldn't have had time 
during that brief interval when I left him not, that is, unless he fairly hared 

down there and back again, and I doubt if he's in good enough training to do that 

and show no signs of it." 

Vera said: 

"He didn't do it then. He had an opportunity later." 

"When?" 

"When he went down to call the General to lunch." 

Philip whistled again very softly. He said: 

"So you think he did it then? Pretty cool thing to do." 

Vera said impatiently: 

"What risk was there? He's the only person here with medical knowledge. He 
can swear the body's been dead at least an hour and who's to contradict him?" 



Philip looked at her thoughtfully. 

"You know," he said, "that's a clever idea of yours. I wonder " 

II 

"Who is it, Mr. Blore? That's what I want to know. Who is it?" 

Rogers' face was working. His hands were clenched round the polishing leather 
that he held in his hand. 

Exinspector Blore said: 

"Eh, my lad, that's the question!" 

"One of us, 'is lordship said. Which one? That's what I want to know. Who's the 
fiend in 'uman form?" 

"That," said Blore, "is what we all would like to know." 

Rogers said shrewdly: 

"But you've got an idea, Mr. Blore. You've got an idea, 'aven't you?" 

"I may have an idea," said Blore slowly. "But that's a long way from being sure. 

I may be wrong. All I can say is that if I'm right the person in question is a very 

cool customer a very cool customer indeed." 

Rogers wiped the perspiration from his forehead. He said hoarsely: 

"It's like a bad dream, that's what it is." 

Blore said, looking at him curiously: 

"Got any ideas yourself, Rogers?" 

The butler shook his head. He said hoarsely: 

"I don't know. I don't know at all. And that's what's frightening the life out of me. 



To have no idea..." 


Ill 

 DrArmstrong said violently: 

"We must get out of here we must we must! At all costs!" 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave looked thoughtfully out of the smokingroom window. He 
played with the cord of his eyeglasses. He said: 

"I do not, of course, profess to be a weather prophet. But I should say that it is 
very unlikely that a boat could reach us even if they knew of our plight under 
twentyfour hours and even then only if the wind drops." 

 DrArmstrong dropped his head in his hands and groaned. 

He said: 

"And in the meantime we may all be murdered in our beds?" 

"I hope not," said Mr.  JusticeWargrave. "I intend to take every possible 
precaution against such a thing happening." 

It flashed across  DrArmstrong's mind that an old man like the JusticeWargrave, was far 
more tenacious of life than a younger man would be. He had often marvelled at 
that fact in his professional career. Here was he, junior to the JusticeWargrave by perhaps 
twenty years, and yet with a vastly inferior sense of selfpreservation. 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave was thinking: 

"Murdered in our beds! These doctors are all the same they think in clichns. A 
thoroughly commonplace mind." 

The doctor said: 

"There have been three victims already, remember." 



"Certainly. But you must remember that they were unprepared for the attack. 
We are forewarned." 

 DrArmstrong said bitterly: 

"What can we do? Sooner or later " 

"I think," said Mr.  JusticeWargrave, "that there are several things we can do." 
DrArmstrong said: 

"We've no idea, even, who it can be " 

The JusticeWargrave stroked his chin and murmured: 

"Oh, you know, I wouldn't quite say that." 

DrArmstrong stared at him. 

"Do you mean you know?" 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave said cautiously: 

"As regards actual evidence, such as is necessary in court, I admit that I have 
none. But it appears to me, reviewing the whole business, that one particular 

person is sufficiently clearly indicated. Yes, I think so." 

DrArmstrong stared at him. 

He said: 

"I don't understand." 

IV 

Miss Brent was upstairs in her bedroom. 

She took up her Bible and went to sit by the window. 



She opened it. Then, after a minute's hesitation, she set it aside and went over to 
the dressingtable. From a drawer in it she took out a small blackcovered 
notebook. 

She opened it and began writing. 

"A terrible thing has happened. General Macarthur is dead. (His cousin married 
Elsie MacPherson.) There is no doubt but that he was murdered. After luncheon 

the JusticeWargrave made us a most interesting speech. He is convinced that the murderer 

is one of us. That means that one of us is possessed by a devil. I had already 

suspected that. Which of us is it? They are all asking themselves that. I alone 

know..." 

She sat for some time without moving. Her eyes grew vague and filmy. The 
pencil 

straggled drunkenly in her fingers. In shaking loose capitals she wrote: 

THE MURDERER'S NAME IS BEATRICE TAYLOR... 

Her eyes closed. 

Suddenly, with a start, she awoke. She looked down at the notebook. With an 
angry exclamation she scored through the vague unevenly scrawled characters of 
the last sentence. 

She said in a low voice: 

"Did I write that? Did I? I must be going mad..." 

V 

The storm increased. The wind howled against the side of the house. 

Every one was in the livingroom. They sat listlessly huddled together. And, 



surreptitiously, they watched each other. 

When Rogers brought in the teatray, they all jumped. 

He said: 

"Shall I draw the curtains? It would make it more cheerful like." 

Receiving an assent to this, the curtains were drawn and the lamps turned on. 

The room grew more cheerful. A little of the shadow lifted. Surely, by tomorrow, 
the storm would be over and some one would come a boat would arrive...Vera 
Claythorne said: 

"Will you pour out tea, Miss Brent?" 

The elder woman replied: 

"No, you do it, dear. That teapot is so heavy. And I have lost two skeins of my 
grey knittingwool. So annoying." 

Vera moved to the teatable. There was a cheerful rattle and clink of china. 
Normality returned. 

Tea! Blessed ordinary everyday afternoon tea! Philip Lombard made a cheery 

remark. Blore responded.  DrArmstrong told a humorous story. Mr.  
JusticeWargrave, who ordinarily hated tea, sipped approvingly. 

Into this relaxed atmosphere came Rogers. 

And Rogers was upset. He said nervously and at random: 

"Excuse me, sir, but does any one know what's become of the bathroom 
curtain?" 


Lombard's head went up with a jerk. 



"The bathroom curtain? What the devil do you mean, Rogers?" 

"It's gone, sir, clean vanished. I was going round drawing all the curtains and the 
one in the lav bathroom wasn't there any longer." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave asked: 

"Was it there this morning?" 

"Oh, yes, sir." 

Blore said: 

"What kind of a curtain was it?" 

"Scarlet oilsilk, sir. It went with the scarlet tiles." 

Lombard said: 

"And it's gone?" 

"Gone, sir." 

They stared at each other. 

Blore said heavily: 

"Well after all what of it? It's mad but so's everything else. Anyway, it doesn't 
matter. You can't kill anybody with an oilsilk curtain. Forget about it." 

Rogers said: 

"Yes, sir, thank you, sir." 

He went out, shutting the door behind him. 

Inside the room, the pall of fear had fallen anew. 

Again, surreptitiously, they watched each other. 


VI 



Dinner came, was eaten, and cleared away. A simple meal, mostly out of tins. 
Afterwards, in the livingroom, the strain was almost too great to be borne. 

At nine o'clock, Emily Brent rose to her feet. 

She said: 

"I'm going to bed." 

Vera said: 

"I'll go to bed too." 

The two women went up the stairs and Lombard and Blore went with them. 
Standing at the top of the stairs, the two men watched the women go into their 
respective rooms and shut the doors. They heard the sound of two bolts being 
shot and the turning of two keys. 

Blore said with a grin: 

"No need to tell 'em to lock their doors!" 

Lombard said: 

"Well, they're all right for the night, at any rate!" He went down again and the 
other followed him. 

VII 

The four men went to bed an hour later. They went up together. Rogers, from the 
diningroom where he was setting the table for breakfast, saw them go up. He 
heard them pause on the landing above. 

Then the JusticeWargrave's voice spoke: 



"I need hardly advise you, gentlemen, to lock your doors." 

Blore said: 

"And, what's more, put a chair under the handle. There are ways of turning locks 
from the outside." 

Lombard murmured: 

"My dear Blore, the trouble with you is you know too much!" 

The JusticeWargrave said gravely: 

"Goodnight, gentlemen. May we all meet safely in the morning!" 

Rogers came out of the diningroom and slipped halfway up the stairs. He saw 
four figures pass through four doors and heard the turning of four locks and the 
shooting of four bolts. 

He nodded his head. 

"That's all right," he muttered. 

He went back into the diningroom. Yes, everything was ready for the morning. 
His eye lingered on the centre plaque of lookingglass and the seven little china 
figures. 

A sudden grin transformed his face. 

He murmured: 

"I'll see no one plays tricks tonight, at any rate." 

Crossing the room he locked the door to the pantry. Then going through the 
other door to the hall he pulled the door to, locked it and slipped the key into his 

pocket. 



Then, extinguishing the lights, he hurried up the stairs and into his new bedroom. 
There was only one possible hidingplace in it, the tall wardrobe, and he looked 
into that immediately. Then, locking and bolting the door, he prepared for bed. 

He said to himself: 

"No more Indian tricks tonight I've seen to that..." 



Chapter 11 

Philip Lombard had the habit of waking at daybreak. He did so on this particular 

morning. He raised himself on an elbow and listened. The wind had somewhat 

abated but was still blowing. He could hear no sound of rain... 

At eight o'clock the wind was blowing more strongly, but Lombard did not hear 
it. 

He was asleep again. 

At ninethirty he was sitting on the edge of his bed looking at his watch. He put 
it to his ear. Then his lips drew back from his teeth in that curious wolflike 
smile characteristic of the man. 

He said very softly: 

"I think the time has come to do something about this." 

At twentyfive minutes to ten he was tapping on the closed door of Blore's room. 
The latter opened it cautiously. His hair was tousled and his eyes were still dim 
with sleep. 

Philip Lombard said affably: 

"Sleeping the clock round? Well, shows you've got an easy conscience." 

Blore said shortly: 

"What's the matter?" 


Lombard answered: 



"Anybody called you or brought you any tea? Do you know what time it is?" 
Blore looked over his shoulder at a small travelling clock by his bedside. 

He said: 

"Twentyfive to ten. Wouldn't have believed I could have slept like that. Where's 
Rogers?" 

Philip Lombard said: 

"It's a case of echo answers where?" 

"What d'you mean?" asked the other sharply. 

Lombard said: 

"I mean that Rogers is missing. He isn't in his room or anywhere else. And 
there's no kettle on and the kitchen fire isn't even lit." 

Blore swore under his breath. He said: 

"Where the devil can he be? Out on the island somewhere? Wait till I get some 
clothes on. See if the others know anything." 

Philip Lombard nodded. He moved along the line of closed doors. 

He found DrArmstrong up and nearly dressed. Mr.  JusticeWargrave, like Blore, 

had to be roused from sleep. Vera Claythorne was dressed. Emily Brent's room 

was empty. 

The little party moved through the house. Rogers' room, as Philip Lombard had 
already ascertained, was untenanted. The bed had been slept in, and his razor 
and sponge and soap were wet. 


Lombard said: 



"He got up all right." 

Vera said in a low voice which she tried to make firm and assured: 

"You don't think he's hiding somewhere waiting for us?" 

Lombard said: 

"My dear girl, I'm prepared to think anything of any one! My advice is that we 
keep together until we find him." 

DrArmstrong said: 

"He must be out on the island somewhere." 

Blore who had joined them, dressed, but still unshaved, said: 

"Where's Miss Brent got to that's another mystery?" 

But as they arrived in the hall, Emily Brent came in through the front door. She 
had on a mackintosh. She said: 

"The sea is as high as ever. I shouldn't think any boat could put out today." 

Blore said: 

"Have you been wandering about the island alone, Miss Brent? Don't you realize 
that that's an exceedingly foolish thing to do?" 

Emily Brent said: 

"I assure you, Mr. Blore, that I kept an extremely sharp lookout." 

Blore grunted. He said: 

"Seen anything of Rogers?" 

Miss Brent's eyebrows rose. 

"Rogers? No, I haven't seen him this morning. Why?" 



Mr.  JusticeWargrave, shaved, dressed and with his false teeth in position, came 
down the stairs. He moved to the open diningroom door. He said: 

"He laid the table for breakfast, I see." 

Lombard said: 

"He might have done that last night." 

They all moved inside the room, looking at the neatly set plates and cutlery. At 

the row of cups on the sideboard. At the felt mats placed ready for the coffee 
urn. 

It was Vera who saw it first. She caught the JusticeWargrave's arm and the grip of her 
athletic fingers made the old gentleman wince. 

She cried out: 

"The Indians! Look!" 

There were only six china figures in the middle of the table. 

II 

They found him shortly afterwards. 

He was in the little washhouse across the yard. He had been chopping sticks in 

preparation for lighting the kitchen fire. The small chopper was still in his hand. 

A bigger chopper, a heavy affair, was leaning against the door the metal of it 
stained a dull brown. It corresponded only too well with the deep wound in the 

back of Rogers' head... 

III 

"Perfectly clear," said DrArmstrong. "The murderer must have crept up behind him, 



swung the chopper once and brought it down on his head as he was bending 
over." 

Blore was busy on the handle of the chopper and the flour sifter from the 
kitchen. 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave asked: 

"Would it have needed great force, doctor?" 

DrArmstrong said gravely: 

"A woman could have done it if that's what you mean." He gave a quick glance 
round. Vera Claythorne and Emily Brent had retired to the kitchen. "The girl 

could have done it easily she's an athletic type. In appearance Miss Brent is 

fragile looking, but that type of woman has often a lot of wiry strength. And you 

must remember that any one who's mentally unhinged has a good deal of 
unsuspected strength." 

The JusticeWargrave nodded thoughtfully. 

Blore rose from his knees with a sigh. He said: 

"No fingerprints. Handle was wiped afterwards." 

A sound of laughter was heard they turned sharply. Vera Claythorne was 
standing in the yard. She cried out in a high shrill voice, shaken with wild bursts 
of laughter: 

"Do they keep bees on this island? Tell me that. Where do we go for honey? Ha! 
ha!" 

They stared at her uncomprehendingly. It was as though the sane wellbalanced 
girl had gone mad before their eyes. She went on in that high unnatural voice: 



"Don't stare like that! As though you thought I was mad. It's sane enough what 
I'm asking. Bees, hives, bees! Oh, don't you understand? Haven't you read that 

idiotic rhyme? It's up in all your bedrooms put there for you to study! We might 
have come here straightaway if we'd had sense. Seven little Indian boys 
chopping 

up sticks. And the next verse. I know the whole thing by heart, I tell you! Six 
little Indian boys playing with a hive. And that's why I'm asking do they keep 
bees on this island? isn't it funny? isn't it damned funny...?" 

She began laughing wildly again.  DrArmstrong strode forward. He raised his 
hand and struck her a flat blow on the cheek. 

She gasped, hiccuped and swallowed. She stood motionless a minute, then she 
said: 

"Thank you... I'm all right now." 

Her voice was once more calm and controlled the voice of the efficient games 
mistress. 

She turned and went across the yard into the kitchen saying: "Miss Brent and I 
are getting you breakfast. Can you bring some sticks to light the fire?" 

The marks of the doctor's hand stood out red on her cheek. 

As she went into the kitchen Blore said: 

"Well, you dealt with that all right, doctor." 

DrArmstrong said apologetically: 

"Had to! We can't cope with hysteria on the top of everything else." 


Philip Lombard said: 



"She's not a hysterical type." 

DrArmstrong agreed. 

"Oh, no. Good healthy sensible girl. Just the sudden shock. It might happen to 
anybody." 

Rogers had chopped a certain amount of firewood before he had been killed. 
They 

gathered it up and took it into the kitchen. Vera and Emily Brent were busy. 

Miss Brent was raking out the stove. Vera was cutting the rind off the bacon. 
Emily Brent said: 

"Thank you. We'll be as quick as we can say half an hour to three quarters. The 
kettle's got to boil." 

IV 

Exinspector Blore said in a low hoarse voice to Philip Lombard: 

"Know what I'm thinking?" 

Philip Lombard said: 

"As you're just about to tell me, it's not worth the trouble of guessing." 
Exinspector Blore was an earnest man. A light touch was incomprehensible to 
him. He went on heavily: 

"There was a case in America. Old gentleman and his wife both killed with an 
axe. Middle of the morning. Nobody in the house but the daughter and the maid. 

Maid, it was proved, couldn't have done it. Daughter was a respectable 
middleaged spinster. Seemed incredible. So incredible that they acquitted her. 
But they never found any other explanation." He paused. "I thought of that when 
I saw the axe and then when I went into the kitchen and saw her there so neat 
and calm. 



Hadn't turned a hair! That girl, coming all over hysterical well, that's natural 
the sort of thing you'd expect don't you think so?" 

Philip Lombard said laconically: 

"It might be." 

Blore went on. 

"But the other! So neat and prim wrapped up in that apron Mrs. Rogers' 

apron, I suppose saying: 'Breakfast will be ready in half an hour or so.' If you 

ask me that woman's as mad as a hatter! Lots of elderly spinsters go that way I 
don't mean go in for homicide on the grand scale, but go queer in their heads. 

Unfortunately it's taken her this way. Religious mania thinks she's God's 
instrument, something of that kind! She sits in her room, you know, reading her 

Bible." 

Philip Lombard sighed and said: 

"That's hardly proof positive of an unbalanced mentality, Blore." 

But Blore went on, ploddingly, perseveringly: 

"And then she was out in her mackintosh, said she'd been down to look at the 
sea." 

The other shook his head. 

He said: 

"Rogers was killed as he was chopping firewood that is to say first thing when 
he got up. The Brent woman wouldn't have needed to wander about outside for 

hours afterwards. If you ask me, the murderer of Rogers would take jolly good 

care to be rolled up in bed snoring." 



Blore said: 


"You're missing the point, Mr. Lombard. If the woman was innocent she'd be too 
dead scared to go wandering about by herself. She'd only do that if she knew that 

she had nothing to fear. That's to say if she herself is the criminal." 

Philip Lombard said: 

"That's a good point... Yes, I hadn't thought of that." 

He added with a faint grin: 

"Glad you don't still suspect me." 

Blore said rather shamefacedly: 

"I did start by thinking of you that revolver and the queer story you told or didn't 
tell. But I've realized now that that was really a bit too obvious," He paused and 
said: "Hope you feel the same about me." 

Philip said thoughtfully: 

"I may be wrong, of course, but I can't feel that you've got enough imagination 
for this job. All I can say is, if you're the criminal, you're a damned fine actor 
and I take my hat off to you." He lowered his voice. "Just between ourselves, 
Blore, and taking into account that we'll probably both be a couple of stiffs 
before another 

day is out, you did indulge in that spot of perjury, I suppose?" 

Blore shifted uneasily from one foot to the other. He said at last: 

"Doesn't seem to make much odds now. Oh, well, here goes. Landor was 
innocent right enough. The gang had got me squared and between us we got him 
put away 

for a stretch. Mind you, I wouldn't admit this " 

"If there were any witnesses," finished Lombard with a grin. "It's just between 
you and me. Well, I hope you made a tidy bit out of it." 



"Didn't make what I should have done. Mean crowd, the Purcell gang. I got my 
promotion, though." 

"And Landor got penal servitude and died in prison." 

"I couldn't know he was going to die, could I?" demanded Blore. 

"No, that was your bad luck." 

"Mine? His, you mean." 

"Yours, too. Because, as a result of it, it looks as though your own life is going to 
be cut unpleasantly short." 

"Me?" Blore stared at him. "Do you think I'm going to go the way of Rogers and 
the rest of them? Not me! I'm watching out for myself pretty carefully, I can tell 
you." 

Lombard said: 

"Oh, well I'm not a betting man. And anyway if you were dead I wouldn't get 
paid." 

"Look here, Mr. Lombard, what do you mean?" 

Philip Lombard showed his teeth. He said: 

"I mean, my dear Blore, that in my opinion you haven't got a chance!" 

"What?" 

"Your lack of imagination is going to make you absolutely a sitting target. A 
criminal of the imagination of U.N. Owen can make rings round you any time he 

or she wants to." 

Blore's face went crimson. He demanded angrily: 

"And what about you?" 

Philip Lombard's face went hard and dangerous. 



He said: 


"I've a pretty good imagination of my own. I've been in tight places before now 
and got out of them! I think I won't say more than that but I think I'll get out of 
this one." 

V 

The eggs were in the fryingpan. Vera, at the stove, thought to herself: 

"Why did I make a hysterical fool of myself? That was a mistake. Keep calm, 
my girl, keep calm." 

After all, she'd always prided herself on her levelheadedness! 

"Miss Claythorne was wonderful kept her head started off swimming after 
Cyril at once." 

Why think of that now? All that was over over... Cyril had disappeared long 

before she got near the rock. She had felt the current take her, sweeping her out 

to sea. She had let herself go with it swimming quietly, floating till the boat 
arrived at last... 

They had praised her courage and her sangfroid... 

But not Hugo. Hugo had just looked at her... 

God, how it hurt, even now, to think of Hugo... 

Where was he? What was he doing? Was he engaged married? 

Emily Brent said sharply: 

"Vera, that bacon is burning." 

"Oh, sorry, Miss Brent, so it is. How stupid of me." 

Emily Brent lifted out the last egg from the sizzling fat. 



Vera, putting fresh pieces of bacon in the fryingpan, said curiously: 

"You're wonderfully calm, Miss Brent." 

Emily Brent said, pressing her lips together: 

"I was brought up to keep my head and never to make a fuss." 

Vera thought mechanically: 

"Repressed as a child... That accounts for a lot..." 

She said: 

"Aren't you afraid?" 

She paused and then added: 

"Or don't you mind dying?" 

Dying! It was as though a sharp little gimlet had run into the solid congealed 

mass of Emily Brent's brain. Dying? But she wasn't going to die! The others 

would die yes but not she, Emily Brent. This girl didn't understand! Emily 

wasn't afraid naturally none of the Brents were afraid, All her people were 

Service people. They faced death unflinchingly. They led upright lives just as 
she, Emily Brent, had led an upright life... She had never done anything to be 
ashamed of... And so, naturally, she wasn't going to die... 

"The Lord is mindful of his own." "Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by 
night; nor for the arrow that flieth by day..." It was daylight now there was no 
terror. "We shall none of us leave this island... Who had said that? General 
Macarthur, of course, whose cousin had married Elsie MacPherson. He hadn't 

seemed to care. He had seemed actually to welcome the idea! Wicked! Almost 

impious to feel that way. Some people thought so little of death that they actually 
took their own lives. Beatrice Taylor... Last night she had dreamed of Beatrice 



dreamt that she was outside pressing her face against the window and moaning, 
asking to be let in. But Emily Brent hadn't wanted to let her in. Because, if she 
did, something terrible would happen... 

Emily came to herself with a start. That girl was looking at her very strangely. 
She said in a brisk voice: 

"Everything's ready, isn't it? We'll take the breakfast in." 

VI 

Breakfast was a curious meal. Every one was very polite. 

"May I get you some more coffee, Miss Brent?" 

"Miss Claythorne, a slice of ham?" 

"Another piece of bacon?" 

Six people, all outwardly selfpossessed and normal. 

And within? Thoughts that ran round in a circle like squirrels in a cage... 

"What next? What next? Who? Which?" 

"Would it work? I wonder. It's worth trying. If there's time. My God, if there's 
time..." 

"Religious mania, that's the ticket... Looking at her, though, you can hardly 
believe it... Suppose I'm wrong..." 

"It's crazy every thing's crazy. I'm going crazy. Wool disappearing red silk 
curtains it doesn't make sense. I can't get the hang of it..." 

"The damned fool, he believed every word I said to him. It was easy... I must be 
careful, though, very careful... 

"Six of those little china figures... only six how many will there be by 



tonight?..." 

"Who'll have the last egg?" 

"Marmalade?" 

"Thanks, can I give you some ham?" 

Six people, behaving normally at breakfast... 



Chapter 12 


The meal was over. 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave cleared his throat. He said in a small authoritative voice: 

"It would be advisable, I think, if we met to discuss the situation. Shall we say in 
half an hour's time in the drawingroom?" 

Every one made a sound suggestive of agreement. 

Vera began to pile plates together. 

She said: 

"I'll clear away and wash up." 

Philip Lombard said: 

"We'll bring the stuff out to the pantry for you." 

"Thanks." 

Emily Brent, rising to her feet; sat down again. She said: 

"Oh, dear." 

The JusticeWargrave said: 

"Anything the matter, Miss Brent?" 

Emily said apologetically: 

"I'm sorry. I'd like to help Miss Claythorne, but I don't know how it is. I feel just 
a little giddy." 

"Giddy, eh?"  DrArmstrong came towards her. "Quite natural. Delayed shock. I 
can give you something to " 



"No!" 


The word burst from her lips like an exploding shell. 

It took every one aback.  DrArmstrong flushed a deep red. 

There was no mistaking the fear and suspicion in her face. He said stiffly: 

"Just as you please, Miss Brent." 

She said: 

"I don't wish to take anything anything at all. I will just sit here quietly till the 
giddiness passes off." 

They finished clearing away the breakfast things. Blore said: 

"I'm a domestic sort of man. I'll give you a hand, Miss Claythorne." 

Vera said: "Thank you." 

Emily Brent was left alone sitting in the diningroom. 

For a while she heard a faint murmur of voices from the pantry. 

The giddiness was passing. She felt drowsy now, as though she could easily go 
to 

sleep. 

There was a buzzing in her ears or was it a real buzzing in the room? 

She thought: 

"It's like a bee a bumblebee." 

Presently she saw the bee. It was crawling up the windowpane. 

Vera Claythorne had talked about bees this morning. 

Bees and honey... 



She liked honey. Honey in the comb, and strain it yourself through a muslin bag. 
Drip, drip, drip... 

There was somebody in the room... somebody all wet and dripping... Beatrice 
Taylor came from the river... 

She had only to turn her head and she would see her. 

But she couldn't turn her head... 

If she were to call out... 

But she couldn't call out... 

There was no one else in the house. She was all alone... 

She heard footsteps soft dragging footsteps coming up behind her. The stumbling 
footsteps of the drowned girl... 

There was a wet dank smell in her nostrils... 

On the windowpane the bee was buzzing buzzing... 

And then she felt the prick. 

The bee sting on the side of her neck... 

II 

In the drawingroom they were waiting for Emily Brent. 

Vera Claythorne said: 

"Shall I go and fetch her?" 

Blore said quickly: 

"Just a minute." 

Vera sat down again. Every one looked inquiringly at Blore. 



He said: 


"Look here, everybody, my opinion's this: we needn't look farther for the author 
of these deaths than the diningroom at this minute. I'd take my oath that woman's 

the one we're after!" 

DrArmstrong said: 

"And the motive?" 

"Religious mania. What do you say, doctor?" 

DrArmstrong said: 

"It's perfectly possible. I've nothing to say against it. But of course we've no 
proof." 

Vera said: 

"She was very odd in the kitchen when we were getting breakfast. Her eyes " 

She shivered. 

Lombard said: 

"You can't JusticeWargrave her by that. We're all a bit off our heads by now!" 

Blore said: 

"There's another thing. She's the only one who wouldn't give an explanation after 
that gramophone record. Why? Because she hadn't any to give." 

Vera stirred in her chair. She said: 

"That's not quite true. She told me afterwards." 

JusticeWargrave said: 

"What did she tell you, Miss Claythorne?" 



Vera repeated the story of Beatrice Taylor. 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave observed: 

"A perfectly straightforward story. I personally should have no difficulty in 
accepting it. Tell me, Miss Claythorne, did she appear to be troubled by a sense 
of guilt or a feeling of remorse for her attitude in the matter?" 

"None whatever," said Vera. "She was completely unmoved." 

Blore said: 

"Hearts as hard as flints, these righteous spinsters! Envy, mostly!" 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave said: 

"It is now five minutes to eleven. I think we should summon Miss Brent to join 
our conclave." 

Blore said: 

"Aren't you going to take any action?" 

The judge said: 

"I fail to see what action we can take. Our suspicions are, at the moment, only 
suspicions. I will, however, ask  DrArmstrong to observe Miss Brent's 
demeanour very carefully. Let us now go into the diningroom." 

They found Emily Brent sitting in the chair in which they had left her. From 

behind they saw nothing amiss, except that she did not seem to hear their 
entrance into the room. 

And then they saw her face suffused with blood, with blue lips and staring eyes. 
Blore said: 

"My God, she's dead!" 


Ill 



The small quiet voice of Mr.  JusticeWargrave said: 

"One more of us acquitted too late!" 

DrArmstrong was bent over the dead woman. He sniffed the lips, shook his head, 
peered into the eyelids. 

Lombard said impatiently: 

"How did she die, doctor? She was all right when we left her here!" 

DrArmstrong's attention was riveted on a mark on the right side of the neck. 

He said: 

"That's the mark of a hypodermic syringe." 

There was a buzzing sound from the window. Vera cried: 

"Look a bee a bumblebee. Remember what I said this morning!" 

DrArmstrong said grimly: 

"It wasn't that bee that stung her! A human hand held the syringe." 

The JusticeWargrave asked: 

"What poison was injected?" 

DrArmstrong answered: 

"At a guess, one of the cyanides. Probably Potassium Cyanide, same as Anthony 
Marston. She must have died almost immediately by asphyxiation." 

Vera cried: 

"But that bee? It can't be coincidence?" 

Lombard said grimly: 

"Oh, no, it isn't coincidence! It's our murderer's touch of local colour! He's a 



playful beast. Likes to stick to his damnable nursery jingle as closely as 
possible'" 

For the first time his voice was uneven, almost shrill. It was as though even his 
nerves, seasoned by a long career of hazards and dangerous undertakings, had 
given out at last. 

He said violently: 

"It's mad! absolutely mad we're all mad!" 

The JusticeWargrave said calmly: 

"We have still, I hope, our reasoning powers. Did any one bring a hypodermic 
syringe to this house?" 

 DrArmstrong, straightening himself, said in a voice that was not too well 
assured: 

"Yes, I did." 

Four pairs of eyes fastened on him. He braced himself against the deep hostile 
suspicion of those eyes. He said: 

"Always travel with one. Most doctors do." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave said calmly: 

"Quite so. Will you tell us, doctor, where that syringe is now?" 

"In the suitcase in my room." 

JusticeWargrave said: 

"We might, perhaps, verify that fact." 

The five of them went upstairs, a silent procession. 



The contents of the suitcase were turned out on the floor. 


The hypodermic syringe was not there. 

IV 

DrArmstrong said violently: 

"Somebody must have taken it!" 

There was silence in the room. 

DrArmstrong stood with his back to the window. Four pairs of eyes were on him, 

black with suspicion and accusation. He looked from JusticeWargrave to Vera and 
repeated helplessly weakly: 

"I tell you some one must have taken it." 

Blore was looking at Lombard who returned his gaze. 

The JusticeWargrave said: 

"There are five of us here in this room. One of us is a murderer. The position is 
fraught with grave danger. Everything must be done in order to safeguard the 

four of us who are innocent. I will now ask you,  DrArmstrong, what drugs you 

have in your possession?" 

DrArmstrong replied: 

"I have a small medicine case here. You can examine it. You will find some 

sleeping stuff trional and sulphonal tablets a packet of bromide, bicarbonate of 
soda, aspirin. Nothing else. I have no cyanide in my possession." 

The JusticeWargrave said: 

"I have, myself, some sleeping tablets sulphonal, I think they are. I presume they 
would be lethal if a sufficiently large dose were given. You, Mr. Lombard, 



have in your possession a revolver." 

Philip Lombard said sharply: 

"What if I have?" 

"Only this. I propose that the doctor's supply of drugs, my own sulphonal tablets, 
your revolver and anything else of the nature of drugs or firearms should be 

collected together and placed in a safe place. That after this is done, we should 

each of us submit to a search both of our persons and of our effects." 

Lombard said: 

"I'm damned if I'll give up my revolver!" 

JusticeWargrave said sharply: 

"Mr. Lombard, you are a very strongly built and powerful young man, but ex 
Inspector Blore is also a man of powerful physique. I do not know what the 
outcome of a struggle between you would be but I can tell you this. On Blore's 
side, assisting him to the best of our ability will be myself,  DrArmstrong and 
Miss Claythorne. You will appreciate, therefore, that the odds against you if you 
choose to resist will be somewhat heavy." 

Lombard threw his head back. His teeth showed in what was almost a snarl. 

"Oh, very well then. Since you've got it all taped out." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave nodded his head. 

"You are a sensible young man. Where is this revolver of yours?" 

"In the drawer of the table by my bed." 



Good. 


"I'll fetch it." 

"I think it would be desirable if we went with you." 

Philip said with a smile that was still nearer a snarl: 

"Suspicious devil, aren't you?" 

They went along the corridor to Lombard's room. 

Philip strode across to the bedtable and jerked open the drawer. 

Then he recoiled with an oath. 

The drawer of the bedtable was empty. 

V 

"Satisfied?" asked Lombard. 

He had stripped to the skin and he and his room had been meticulously searched 
by the other three men. Vera Claythorne was outside in the corridor. 

The search proceeded methodically. In turn, DrArmstrong, the JusticeWargrave and Blore 
submitted to the same test. 

The four men emerged from Blore's room and approached Vera. It was the JusticeWargrave 
who spoke. 

"I hope you will understand. Miss Claythorne, that we can make no exceptions. 
That revolver must be found. You have, I presume, a bathing dress with you?" 
Vera nodded. 

"Then I will ask you to go into your room and put it on and then come out to us 



here." 


Vera went into her room and shut the door. She reappeared in under a minute 
dressed in a tightfitting silk rucked bathing dress. 

JusticeWargrave nodded approval. 

"Thank you, Miss Claythorne. Now if you will remain here, we will search your 
room." 

Vera waited patiently in the corridor until they emerged. Then she went in, 
dressed, and came out to where they were waiting. 

The JusticeWargrave said: 

"We are now assured of one thing. There are no lethal weapons or drugs in the 
possession of any of us five. That is one point to the good. We will now place the 
drugs in a safe place. There is, I think, a silver chest, is there not, in the pantry?" 

Blore said: 

"That's all very well, but who's to have the key? You, I suppose." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave made no reply. 

He went down to the pantry and the others followed him. There was a small case 

there designed for the purpose of holding silver and plate. By the JusticeWargrave's 
directions, the various drugs were placed in this and it was locked. Then, still on 
JusticeWargrave's instructions, the chest was lifted into the plate cupboard and this in 

turn was locked. The JusticeWargrave then gave the key of the chest to Philip Lombard and 

the key of the cupboard to Blore. 

He said: 

"You two are the strongest physically. It would be difficult for either of you to 
get the key from the other. It would be impossible for any of us three to do so. To 



break open the cupboard or the plate chest would be a noisy and cumbrous 
proceeding and one which could hardly be carried out without attention being 
attracted to what was going on." 

He paused, then went on: 

"We are still faced by one very grave problem. What has become of Mr. 
Lombard's revolver?" 

Blore said: 

"Seems to me its owner is the most likely person to know that." 

A white dint showed in Philip Lombard's nostrils. He said: 

"You damned pigheaded fool! I tell you it's been stolen from me!" 

JusticeWargrave asked: 

"When did you see it last?" 

"Last night. It was in the drawer when I went to bed ready in case anything 
happened." 

The JusticeWargrave nodded. 

He said: 

"It must have been taken this morning during the confusion of searching for 
Rogers or after his dead body was discovered." 

Vera said: 

"It must be hidden somewhere about the house. We must look for it." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave's finger was stroking his chin. He said: 

"I doubt if our search will result in anything. Our murderer has had plenty of 
time to devise a hidingplace. I do not fancy we shall find that revolver easily." 



Blore said forcefully: 

"I don't know where the revolver is, but I'll bet I know where something else is 
that hypodermic syringe. Follow me." 

He opened the front door and led the way round the house. 

A little distance away from the diningroom window he found the syringe. Beside 
it was a smashed china figure a sixth broken Indian boy. 

Blore said in a satisfied voice: 

"Only place it could be. After he'd killed her, he opened the window and threw 
out the syringe and picked up the china figure from the table and followed on 

with that." 

There were no prints on the syringe. It had been carefully wiped. 

Vera said in a determined voice: 

"Now let us look for the revolver." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave said: 

"By all means. But in doing so let us be careful to keep together. Remember, if 
we separate, the murderer gets his chance." 

They searched the house carefully from attic to cellars, but without result. The 
revolver was still missing. 



Chapter 13 


"One of us... One of us... One of us..." 

Three words, endlessly repeated, dinning themselves hour after hour into 
receptive brains. 

Five people five frightened people. Five people who watched each other, who 

now hardly troubled to hide their state of nervous tension. 

There was little pretence now no formal veneer of conversation. They were five 

enemies linked together by a mutual instinct of selfpreservation. 

And all of them, suddenly, looked less like human beings. They were reverted to 

more bestial types. Like a wary old tortoise, Mr.  JusticeWargrave sat hunched 

up, his body motionless, his eyes keen and alert. Exinspector Blore looked 

coarser and clumsier in build. His walk was that of a slow padding animal. His 
eyes were bloodshot. There was a look of mingled ferocity and stupidity about 

him. He was like a beast at bay ready to charge its pursuers. Philip Lombard's 

senses seemed heightened, rather than diminished. His ears reacted to the 
slightest sound. His step was lighter and quicker, his body was lithe and graceful. 
And he smiled often, his lips curling back from his long white teeth. 

Vera Claythorne was very quiet. She sat most of the time huddled in a chair. Her 

eyes stared ahead of her into space. She looked dazed. She was like a bird that 

has dashed its head against glass and that has been picked up by a human hand. 

It crouches there, terrified, unable to move, hoping to save itself by its 
immobility. 



DrArmstrong was in a pitiable condition of nerves. He twitched and his hands 

shook. He lighted cigarette after cigarette and stubbed them out almost 
immediately. The forced inaction of their position seemed to gall him more than 

the others. Every now and then he broke out into a torrent of nervous speech. 

"We we shouldn't just sit here doing nothing! There must be something surely, 
surely, there is something that we can do? If we lit a bonfire " 

Blore said heavily: 

"In this weather?" 

The rain was pouring down again. The wind came in fitful gusts. The depressing 
sound of the pattering rain nearly drove them mad. 

By tacit consent, they had adopted a plan of campaign. They all sat in the big 
drawingroom. Only one person left the room at a time. The other four waited till 
the fifth returned. 

Lombard said: 

"It's only a question of time. The weather will clear. Then we can do something 
signallight fires make a raft something!" 

DrArmstrong said with a sudden cackle of laughter: 

"A question of time time? We can't afford time! We shall all be dead..." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave said, and his small clear voice was heavy with passionate 
determination: 

"Not if we are careful. We must be very careful..." 

The midday meal had been duly eaten but there had been no conventional 



formality about it. All five of them had gone to the kitchen. In the larder they 
had found a great store of tinned foods. They had opened a tin of tongue and two 
tins 

of fruit. They had eaten standing round the kitchen table. Then, herding close 
together, they had returned to the drawingroom to sit there sit watching 
each other... 

And by now the thoughts that ran through their brains were abnormal, feverish, 
diseased... 

"It's DrArmstrong... I saw him looking at me sideways just then... his eyes are 
mad... quite mad... Perhaps he isn't a doctor at all... That's it, of course!... He's a 
lunatic, escaped from some doctor's house pretending to be a doctor... It's true... 

shall I tell them?... Shall I scream out?... No, it won't do to put him on his 
guard... 

Besides he can seem so sane... What time is it?... Only a quarter past three!... Oh, 
God, I shall go mad myself... Yes, it's DrArmstrong... He's watching me now..." 

"They won't get me! I can take care of myself... I've been in tight places before... 

Where the hell is that revolver?... Who took it?... Who's got it?... Nobody's got it 

we know that. We were all searched... Nobody can have it... But some one 
knows 

where it is..." 

"They're going mad... they're all go mad... Afraid of death... we're all afraid of 
death... I'm afraid of death... Yes, but that doesn't stop death coming... 'The 
hearse is at the door, sir.' Where did I read that? The girl... I'll watch the girl. 

Yes, I'll watch the girl..." 

"Twenty to four... only twenty to four... perhaps the clock has stopped... I don't 
understand no, I don't understand... This sort of thing can't happen... it is 



happening... Why don't we wake up? Wake up Judgement Day not that! If I 

could only think... My head something's happening in my head it's going to 

burst it's going to split... This sort of thing can't happen... What's the time? Oh, 
God! it's only a quarter to four." 

"I must keep my head... I must keep my head... If only I keep my head... It's all 
perfectly clear all worked out. But nobody must suspect. It may do the trick. It 
must! Which one? That's the question which one? I think yes, I rather think 

yes him." 

When the clock struck five they all jumped. 

Vera said: 

"Does any one want tea?" 

There was a moment's silence. Blore said: 

"I'd like a cup." 

Vera rose. She said: 

"I'll go and make it. You can all stay here." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave said gently: 

"I think, my dear young lady, we would all prefer to come and watch you make 
it." 

Vera stared, then gave a short rather hysterical laugh. 

She said: 

"Of course! You would!" 

Five people went into the kitchen. Tea was made and drunk by Vera and Blore. 



The other three had whiskey opening a fresh bottle and using a siphon from a 
nailed up case. 

The JusticeWargrave murmured with a reptilian smile: 

"We must be very careful..." 

They went back again to the drawingroom. Although it was summer the room 

was dark. Lombard switched on the lights but they did not come on. He said: 

"Of course! The engine's not been run today since Rogers hasn't been there to 
see to it." 

He hesitated and said: 

"We could go out and get it going, I suppose." 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave said: 

"There are packets of candles in the larder, I saw them, better use those." 
Lombard went out. The other four sat watching each other. 

He came back with a box of candles and a pile of saucers. Five candles were lit 
and placed about the room. 

The time was a quarter to six. 

II 

At twenty past six, Vera felt that to sit there longer was unbearable. She would 

go to her room and bathe her aching head and temples in cold water. 

She got up and went towards the door. Then she remembered and came back and 

got a candle out of the box. She lighted it, let a little wax pour into a saucer and 
stuck the candle firmly to it. Then she went out of the room, shutting the door 



behind her and leaving the four men inside. 

She went up the stairs and along the passage to her room. 

As she opened her door, she suddenly halted and stood stock still. 

Her nostrils quivered. 

The sea... The smell of the sea at St. Tredennick... 

That was it. She could not be mistaken. Of course one smelt the sea on an island 
anyway, but this was different. It was the smell there had been on the beach that 
day with the tide out and the rocks covered with seaweed drying in the sun. 

"Can I swim out to the island, Miss Claythorne?" 

"Why can't I swim out to the island?..." 

Horrid whiny spoilt little brat! If it weren't for him, Hugo would be rich... able to 
marry the girl he loved... 

Hugo... 

Surely surely Hugo was beside her? No, waiting for her in the room... 

She made a step forward. The draught from the window caught the flame of the 
candle. It flickered and went out... 

Tn the dark she was suddenly afraid... 

"Don't be a fool," Vera Claythorne urged herself. "It's all right. The others are 
downstairs. All four of them. There's no one in the room. There can't be. You're 

imagining things, my girl." 

But that smell that smell of the beach at St. Tredennick... That wasn't imagined. 

It was true... 



And there was some one in the room... She had heard something surely she had 
heard something... 

And then, as she stood there, listening a cold, clammy hand touched her throat 
a wet hand, smelling of the sea... 

Ill 

Vera screamed. She screamed and screamed screams of the utmost terror wild 
desperate cries for help. 

She did not hear the sounds from below, of a chair being overturned, of a door 
opening, of men's feet running up the stairs. She was conscious only of supreme 
terror. 

Then, restoring her sanity, lights flickered in the doorway candles men hurrying 
into the room. 

"What the devil?" "What's happened?" "Good God, what is it?" 

She shuddered, took a step forward, collapsed on the floor. 

She was only half aware of some one bending over her, of some one forcing her 
head down between her knees. 

Then a sudden exclamation, a quick "My God, look at that!" her senses returned 
She opened her eyes and raised her head. She saw what it was the men with the 
candles were looking at. 

A broad ribbon of wet seaweed was hanging down from the ceiling. It was that 
which in the darkness had swayed against her throat. It was that which she had 

taken for a clammy hand, a drowned hand come back from the dead to squeeze 



the life out of her!... 


She began to laugh hysterically. She said: 

"It was seaweed only seaweed and that's what the smell was..." 

And then the faintness came over her once more waves upon waves of sickness. 
Again some one took her head and forced it between her knees. 

Aeons of time seemed to pass. They were offering her something to drink 
pressing the glass against her lips. She smelt brandy. 

She was just about to gulp the spirit gratefully down when, suddenly, a warning 
note like an alarm bell sounded in her brain. She sat up, pushing the glass 
away. 

She said sharply: 

"Where did this come from?" 

Blore's voice answered. He stared a minute before speaking. 

He said: 

"I got it from downstairs." 

Vera cried: 

"I won't drink it..." 

There was a moment's silence, then Lombard laughed. 

He said with appreciation: 

"Good for you, Vera! You've got your wits about you even if you have been 
scared half out of your life. I'll get a fresh bottle that hasn't been opened." 



He went swiftly out. 

Vera said uncertainly: 

"I'm all right now. I'll have some water." 

DrArmstrong supported her as she struggled to her feet. She went over to the basin, 

swaying and clutching at him for support. She let the cold tap run and then filled 
the glass. 

Blore said resentfully: 

"That brandy's all right." 

DrArmstrong said: 

"How do you know?" 

Blore said angrily: 

"I didn't put anything in it. That's what you're getting at, I suppose." 

DrArmstrong said: 

"I'm not saying you did. You might have done it, or some one might have 
tampered with the bottle for just this emergency." 

Lombard came swiftly back into the room. 

He had a new bottle of brandy in his hands and a corkscrew. 

He thrust the sealed bottle under Vera's nose. 

"There you are, my girl. Absolutely no deception." He peeled off the tin foil and 
drew the cork. "Lucky there's a good supply of spirits in the house. Thoughtful 
of U.N. Owen." 

Vera shuddered violently. 

DrArmstrong held the glass while Philip poured the brandy into it. He said: 



"You'd better drink this, Miss Claythorne. You've had a nasty shock." 

Vera drank a little of the spirit. The colour came back to her face. 

Philip Lombard said with a laugh: 

"Well, here's one murder that hasn't gone according to plan!" 

Vera said almost in a whisper: 

"You think that was what was meant?" 

Lombard nodded. 

"Expected you to pass out through fright! Some people would have, wouldn't 
they, doctor?" 

DrArmstrong did not commit himself. He said doubtfully: 

"H'm, impossible to say. Young healthy subject no cardiac weakness. Unlikely. 
On the other hand " 

He picked up the glass of brandy that Blore had brought. He dipped a finger in it, 
tasted it gingerly. His expression did not alter. He said dubiously: "H'm, tastes all 
right." 

Blore stepped forward angrily. He said: 

"If you're saying that I tampered with that, I'll knock your ruddy block off." 

Vera, her wits revived by the brandy, made a diversion by saying: 

"Where's the JusticeWargrave?" 

The three men looked at each other. 

"That's odd... Thought he came up with us." 


Blore said: 



"So did I... What about it, doctor? You came up the stairs behind me." 

DrArmstrong said: 

"I thought he was following me... Of course, he'd be bound to go slower than we 
did. He's an old man." 

They looked at each other again. 

Lombard said: 

"It's damned odd..." 

Blore cried: 

"We must look for him." 

He started for the door. The others followed him, Vera last. 

As they went down the stairs DrArmstrong said over his shoulder: 

"Of course he may have stayed in the livingroom..." 

They crossed the hall. DrArmstrong called out loudly: 

"JusticeWargrave, JusticeWargrave, where are you?" 

There was no answer. A deadly silence filled the house apart from the gentle 
patter of the rain. 

Then, in the entrance to the drawingroom door, DrArmstrong stopped dead. The 
others crowded up and looked over his shoulder. 

Somebody cried out. 

Mr.  JusticeWargrave was silting in his highbacked chair at the end of the room. 
Two candles burnt on either side of him. But what shocked and startled the 



onlookers was the fact that he sat there robed in scarlet with a JusticeWargrave's wig upon 
his head... 

 DrArmstrong motioned to the others to keep back. He himself walked across to 

the silent staring figure, reeling a little as he walked like a drunken man. 

He bent forward, peering into the still face. Then, with a swift movement, he 

raised the wig. It fell to the floor, revealing the high bald forehead with, in the 
very middle, a round stained mark from which something had trickled... 

 DrArmstrong raised the limp hand and felt for the pulse. Then he turned to the 

others. 

He said and his voice was expressionless, dead, far away: 

"He's been shot... " 

Blore said: 

"God the revolver!" 

The doctor said, still in the same lifeless voice: 

"Got him through the head. Instantaneous." 

Vera stooped to the wig. She said, and her voice shook with terror: 

"Miss Brent's missing grey wool..." 

Blore said: 

"And the scarlet curtain that was missing from the bathroom..." 

Vera whispered: 

"So this is what they wanted them for..." 



Suddenly Philip Lombard laughed a high unnatural laugh. 

'"Five little Indian boys going in for law; one got in Chancery and then there 
were four.' That's the end of Mr. Bloody  JusticeWargrave. No more pronouncing 
sentence for him! No more putting on of the black cap! Here's the last time he'll 

ever sit in court! No more summing up and sending innocent men to death. How 

Edward Seton would laugh if he were here! God, how he'd laugh!" 

His outburst shocked and startled the others. 

Vera cried: 

"Only this morning you said he was the one!" 

Philip Lombard's face changed sobered. 

He said in a low voice: 

"I know I did... Well, I was wrong. Here's one more of us who's been proved 
innocent too late!" 

Chapter 14 

They had carried Mr.  JusticeWargrave up to his room and laid him on the bed. 
Then they had come down again and had stood in the hall looking at each other. 
Blore said heavily: 

"What do we do now?" 

Lombard said briskly: 

"Have something to eat. We've got to eat, you know." 

Once again they went into the kitchen. Again they opened a tin of tongue. They 
ate mechanically, almost without tasting. 



Vera said: 


"I shall never eat tongue again." 

They finished the meal. They sat round the kitchen table staring at each other. 
Blore said: 

"Only four of us now... Who'll be the next?" 

DrArmstrong stared. He said, almost mechanically: 

"We must be very careful " and stopped. 

Blore nodded. 

"That's what he said... And now he's dead!" 

DrArmstrong said: 

"How did it happen, I wonder?" 

Lombard swore. He said: 

"A damned clever double cross! That stuff was planted in Miss Claythorne's 
room and it worked just as it was intended to. Every one dashes up there 
thinking 

she's being murdered. And so in the confusion some one caught the old boy off 
his guard." 

Blore said: 

"Why didn't any one hear the shot?" 

Lombard shook his head. 

"Miss Claythorne was screaming, the wind was howling, we were running about 

and calling out. No, it wouldn't be heard." He paused. "But that trick's not going 
to work again. He'll have to try something else next time." 



Blore said: 


"He probably will." 

There was an unpleasant tone in his voice. The two men eyed each other. 
DrArmstrong said: 

"Four of us, and we don't know which..." 

Blore said: 

"I know..." 

Vera said: 

"I haven't the least doubt..." 

DrArmstrong said slowly: 

"I suppose I do know really..." 

Philip Lombard said: 

"I think I've got a pretty good idea now..." 

Again they all looked at each other... 

Vera staggered to her feet. She said: 

"I feel awful. I must go to bed... I'm dead beat." 

Lombard said: 

"Might as well. No good sitting watching each other." 

Blore said: 

"I've no objection..." 


The doctor murmured: 



"The best thing to do although I doubt if any of us will sleep." 

They moved to the door. Blore said: 

"I wonder where that revolver is now?..." 

II 

They went up the stairs. 

The next move was a little like a scene in a farce. 

Each one of the four stood with a hand on his or her bedroom door handle. Then, 
as though at a signal, each one stepped into the room and pulled the door shut. 
There were sounds of bolts and locks, of the moving of furniture. 

Four frightened people were barricaded in until morning. 

III 

Philip Lombard drew a breath of relief as he turned from adjusting a chair under 
the door handle. 

He strolled across to the dressingtable. 

By the light of the flickering candle he studied his face curiously. 

He said softly to himself: 

"Yes, this business has got you rattled all right." 

His sudden wolflike smile flashed out. 

He undressed quickly. 

He went over to the bed, placing his wristwatch on the table by the bed. 

Then he opened the drawer of the table. 



He stood there, staring down at the revolver that was inside it... 
IV 


Vera Claythorne lay in bed. 

The candle still burned beside her. 

As yet she could not summon the courage to put it out. 

She was afraid of the dark... 

She told herself again and again: "You're all right until morning. Nothing 
happened last night. Nothing will happen tonight. Nothing can happen. You're 

locked and bolted in. No one can come near you..." 

And she thought suddenly: 

"Of course! I can stay here! Stay here locked in! Food doesn't really matter! I 
can stay here safely till help comes! Even if it's a day or two days..." 

Stay here. Yes, but could she stay here? Hour after hour with no one to speak 

to, with nothing to do but think... 

She'd begin to think of Cornwall of Hugo of of what she'd said to Cyril. 

Horrid whiny little boy, always pestering her... 

"Miss Claythorne, why can't I swim out to the rock? I can. I know I can." 

Was it her voice that had answered? 

"Of course you can, Cyril, really. I know that." 

"Can I go then, Miss Claythorne?" 

"Well, you see, Cyril, your mother gets so nervous about you. I'll tell you what. 
Tomorrow you can swim out to the rock. I'll talk to your mother on the beach 



and 


distract her attention. And then, when she looks for you, there you'll be standing 
on the rock waving to her! It will be a surprise!" 

"Oh, good egg, Miss Claythorne! That will be a lark!" 

She'd said it now. Tomorrow! Hugo was going to Newquay. When he came back 
it would be all over... 

Yes, but supposing it wasn't? Supposing it went wrong? Cyril might be rescued 
in 

time. And then then he'd say, "Miss Claythorne said I could... Well, what of it? 

One must take some risk! If the worst happened she'd brazen it out. "How can 

you tell such a wicked lie, Cyril? Of course I never said any such thing!" They'd 
believe her all right. Cyril often told stories. He was an untruthful child. Cyril 
would know, of course. But that didn't matter... And anyway nothing would go 

wrong. She'd pretend to swim out after him. But she'd arrive too late... Nobody 

would ever suspect... 

Had Hugo suspected? Was that why he had looked at her in that queer faroff 
way...? Had Hugo known? 

Was that why he had gone off after the inquest so hurriedly? 

He hadn't answered the one letter she had written to him... 

Hugo... 

Vera turned restlessly in bed. No, no, she mustn't think of Hugo. It hurt too 
much! That was all over, over and done with... Hugo must be forgotten... 

Why, this evening, had she suddenly felt that Hugo was in the room with her? 



She stared up at the ceiling, stared at the big black hook in the middle of the 
room. 

She'd never noticed that hook before. 

The seaweed had hung from that... 

She shivered as she remembered that cold clammy touch on her neck... 

She didn't like that hook on the ceiling. It drew your eyes, fascinated you... a big 
black hook... 

V 

Exinspector Blore sat on the side of his bed. 

His small eyes, redrimmed and bloodshot, were alert in the solid mass of his 
face. He was like a wild boar waiting to charge. 

He felt no inclination to sleep. 

The menace was coming very near now... Six out of ten! 

For all his sagacity, for all his caution and astuteness, the old JusticeWargrave had gone the 
way of the rest. 

Blore snorted with a kind of savage satisfaction. 

"What was it the old geezer had said?" 

"We must be very careful..." 

Selfrighteous smug old hypocrite. Sitting up in court feeling like God Almighty. 
He'd got his all right... No more being careful for him. 

And now there were four of them. The girl, Lombard, DrArmstrong and himself. 
Very soon another of them would go... But it wouldn't be William Henry Blore. 



He'd see to that all right. 

(But the revolver... What about the revolver? That was the disturbing factor the 
revolver!) 

Blore sat on his bed, his brow furrowed, his little eyes creased and puckered 
while he pondered the problem of the revolver... 

In the silence he could hear the clocks strike downstairs. 

Midnight. 

He relaxed a little now even went so far as to lie down on his bed. But he did not 
undress. 

He lay there, thinking. Going over the whole business from the beginning, 
methodically, painstakingly, as he had been wont to do in his police officer days. 

It was thoroughness that paid in the end. 

The candle was burning down. Looking to see if the matches were within easy 
reach of his hand, he blew it out. 

Strangely enough, he found the darkness disquieting. It was as though a 
thousand ageold fears awoke and struggled for supremacy in his brain. Faces 

floated in the air the JusticeWargrave's face crowned with that mockery of grey wool the 
cold dead face of Mrs. Rogers the convulsed purple face of Anthony Marston... 

Another face pale, spectacled, with a small strawcoloured moustache... 

A face he had seen sometime or other but when? Not on the island. No, much 
longer ago than that. 

Funny, that he couldn't put a name to it... Silly sort of face really fellow looked a 
bit of a mug. 


Of course! 



It came to him with a real shock. 


Landor! 

Odd to think he'd completely forgotten what Landor looked like. Only yesterday 
he'd been trying to recall the fellow's face, and hadn't been able to. 

And now here it was, every feature clear and distinct, as though he had seen it 
only yesterday... 

Landor had had a wife a thin slip of a woman with a worried face. There'd been 
a kid too, a girl about fourteen. For the first time, he wondered what had become 
of them... 

(The revolver. What had become of the revolver? That was much more 
important...) 

The more he thought about it the more puzzled he was... He didn't understand 
this revolver business... 

Somebody in the house had got that revolver... 

Downstairs a clock struck one. 

Blore's thoughts were cut short. He sat up on the bed, suddenly alert. For he had 
heard a sound a very faint sound somewhere outside his bedroom door. 

There was some one moving about in the darkened house. 

The perspiration broke out on his forehead. Who was it, moving secretly and 
silently along the corridors? Some one who was up to no good, he'd bet that! 
Noiselessly, in spite of his heavy build, he dropped off the bed and with two 



strides was standing by the door listening. 

But the sound did not come again. Nevertheless Blore was convinced that he was 

not mistaken. He had heard a footfall just outside his door. The hair rose slightly 
on his scalp. He knew fear again... 

Some one creeping about stealthily in the night... 

He listened but the sound was not repeated. 

And now a new temptation assailed him. He wanted, desperately, to go out and 

investigate. If he could only see who it was prowling about in the darkness. 

But to open his door would be the action of a fool. Very likely that was exactly 

what the other was waiting for. He might even have meant Blore to hear what he 

had heard, counting on him coming out to investigate. 

Blore stood rigid listening. He could hear sounds everywhere now, cracks, 
mstles, mysterious whispers but his dogged realistic brain knew them for what 

they were the creations of his own heated imagination. 

And then suddenly he heard something that was not imagination. Footsteps, very 
soft, very cautious, but plainly audible to a man listening with all his ears as 

Blore was listening. 

They came softly along the corridor (both Lombard's and DrArmstrong's rooms 
were 

farther from the stairhead than his). They passed his door without hesitating or 
faltering. 

And as they did so, Blore made up his mind. 

He meant to see who it was! The footsteps had definitely passed his door going 



to 

the stairs. Where was the man going? 

When Blore acted, he acted quickly, surprisingly so for a man who looked so 
heavy and slow. He tiptoed back to the bed, slipped matches into his pocket, 
detached the plug of the electric lamp by his bed, and picked it up winding the 
flex round it. It was a chromium affair with a heavy ebonite base a useful 
weapon. 

He sprinted noiselessly across the room, removed the chair from under the door 
handle and with precaution unlocked and unbolted the door. He stepped out into 
the corridor. There was a faint sound in the hall below; Blore ran noiselessly in 
his stockinged feet to the head of the stairs. 

At that moment he realized why it was he had heard all these sounds so clearly. 
The wind had died down completely and the sky must have cleared. There was 
faint moonlight coming in through the landing window and it illuminated the 
hall below. 

Blore had an instantaneous glimpse of a figure just passing out through the front 
door. 

In the act of running down the stairs in pursuit, he paused. 

Once again, he had nearly made a fool of himself! This was a trap, perhaps, to 
lure him out of the house! 


But what the other man didn't realize was that he had made a mistake, had 



delivered himself neady into Blore's hands. 

For, of the three tenanted rooms upstairs, one must now be empty. All that had 
to be done was to ascertain which! 

Blore went swiftly back along the corridor. 

He paused first at  DrArmstrong's door and tapped. There was no answer. 

He waited a minute, then went on to Philip Lombard's room. 

Here the answer came at once. 

"Who's there?" 

"It's Blore. I don't think DrArmstrong is in his room. Wait a minute." 

He went on to the door at the end of the corridor. Here he tapped again. 

"Miss Claythorne. Miss Claythorne." 

Vera's voice, startled, answered him: 

"Who is it? What's the matter?" 

"It's all right, Miss Claythorne. Wait a minute. I'll come back." 

He raced back to Lombard's room. The door opened as he did so. Lombard stood 

there. He held a candle in his left hand. He had pulled on his trousers over his 

pyjamas. His right hand rested in the pocket of his pyjama jacket. He said 
sharply: 

"What the hell's all this?" 

Blore explained rapidly. Lombard's eyes lit up. 

"DrArmstrong eh? So he's our pigeon!" He moved along to DrArmstrong's door. 



"Sorry, Blore, but I don't take anything on trust." 

He rapped sharply on the panel. 

"DrArmstrong DrArmstrong." 

There was no answer. 

Lombard dropped to his knees and peered through the keyhole. He inserted his 
little finger gingerly into the lock. 

He said: 

"Key's not in the door on the inside." 

Blore said: 

"That means he locked it on the outside and took it with him." 

Philip nodded: 

"Ordinary precaution to take. We'll get him, Blore... This time, we'll get him! 
Half a second." 

He raced along to Vera's room. 

"Vera." 

"Yes." 

"We're hunting DrArmstrong. He's out of his room. Whatever you do, don't open 
your door. Understand?" 

"Yes, I understand." 

"If DrArmstrong comes along and says that I've been killed, or Blore's been killed, 
pay no attention. See? Only open your door if both Blore and I speak to you. Got 


that?" 



Vera said: 


"Yes. I'm not a complete fool." 

Lombard said: 

"Good." 

He joined Blore. He said: 

"And now after him! The hunt's up!" 

Blore said: 

"We'd better be careful. He's got a revolver, remember." 

Philip Lombard raced down the stairs chuckling. 

He said: 

"That's where you're wrong." He undid the front door, remarking: "Latch pushed 
back so that he could get in again easily." 

He went on: 

"I've got that revolver!" He took it half out of his pocket as he spoke. "Found it 
put back in my drawer tonight." 

Blore stopped dead on the doorstep. His face changed. Philip Lombard saw it. 

He said impatiently: 

"Don't be a damned fool, Blore! I'm not going to shoot you! Go back and 
barricade yourself in if you like! I'm off after DrArmstrong." 

He started off into the moonlight. Blore, after a minute's hesitation, followed 

him. 


He thought to himself: 



"I suppose I'm asking for it. But after all " 

After all he had tackled criminals armed with revolvers before now. Whatever 

else he lacked, Blore did not lack courage. Show him the danger and he would 

tackle it pluckily. He was not afraid of danger in the open, only of danger 
undefined and tinged with the supernatural. 

VI 

Vera, left to wait results, got up and dressed. 

She glanced over once or twice at the door. It was a good solid door. It was both 

bolted and locked and had an oak chair wedged under the handle. 

It could not be broken open by force. Certainly not by  DrArmstrong. He was 
not 

a physically powerful man. 

If she were DrArmstrong intent on murder, it was cunning that she would employ, 
not force. 

She amused herself by reflecting on the means he might employ. 

He might, as Philip had suggested, announce that one of the other two men was 
dead. Or he might possibly pretend to be mortally wounded himself, might drag 
himself groaning to her door. 

There were other possibilities. He might inform her that the house was on fire. 
More, he might actually set the house on fire... Yes, that would be a possibility. 
Lure the other two men out of the house, then, having previously laid a trail of 
petrol, he might set light to it. And she, like an idiot, would remain barricaded in 



her room until it was too late. 

She crossed over to the window. Not too bad. At a pinch one could escape that 
way. It would mean a drop but there was a handy flowerbed. 

She sat down and picking up her diary began to write in it in a clear flowing 
hand. 

One must pass the time. 

Suddenly she stiffened to attention. She had heard a sound. It was, she thought, 
a sound like breaking glass. And it came from somewhere downstairs. 

She listened hard, but the sound was not repeated. 

She heard, or thought she heard, stealthy sounds of footsteps, the creak of stairs, 
the rustle of garments but there was nothing definite, and she concluded, as 

Blore had done earlier, that such sounds had their origin in her own imagination. 

But presently she heard sounds of a more concrete nature. 

People moving about downstairs the murmur of voices. Then the very decided 

sound of some one mounting the stairs doors opening and shutting feet going 

up to the attics overhead. More noises from there. 

Finally the steps came along the passage. Lombard's voice said: 

"Vera? You all right?" 

"Yes. What's happened?" 

Blore's voice said: 


"Will you let us in?" 



Vera went to the door. She removed the chair, unlocked the door and slid back 
the bolt. She opened the door. The two men were breathing hard, their feet and 
the bottom of their trousers were soaking wet. 

She said again: 

"What's happened?" 

Lombard said: 

"DrArmstrong's disappeared..." 

VII 

Vera cried: 

"What?" 

Lombard said: 

"Vanished clean off the island." 

Blore concurred: 

"Vanished that's the word! Like some damned conjuring trick." 

Vera said impatiently: 

"Nonsense! He's hiding somewhere!" 

Blore said: 

"No, he isn't! I tell you, there's nowhere to hide on this island. It's as bare as your 
hand! There's moonlight outside. As clear as day it is. And he s not to be found." 

Vera said: 


"He doubled back into the house." 



Blore said: 


"We thought of that. We've searched the house too. You must have heard us. He's 
not here, I tell you. He's gone clean vanished, vamoosed..." 

Vera said incredulously: 

"I don't believe it." 

Lombard said: 

"It's true, my dear." 

He paused and then said: 

"There's one other little fact. A pane in the diningroom window has been 
smashed and there are only three little Indian boys on the table." 

Chapter 15 

Three people sat eating breakfast in the kitchen. 

Outside, the sun shone. It was a lovely day. 

The storm was a thing of the past. 

And with the change in the weather, a change had come in the mood of the 
prisoners on the island. 

They felt now like people just awakening from a nightmare. There was danger, 
yet, but it was danger in daylight. That paralyzing atmosphere of fear that had 
wrapped them round like a blanket yesterday while the wind howled outside was 
gone. 

Lombard said: 

"We'll try heliographing today with a mirror from the highest point of the island. 



Some bright lad wandering on the cliff will recognize SOS when he sees it, I 
hope. 

In the evening we could try a bonfire only there isn't much wood and anyway 
they might just think it was song and dance and merriment." 

Vera said: 

"Surely some one can read Morse. And then they'll come to take us off. Long 
before this evening." 

Lombard said: 

"The weather's cleared all right, but the sea hasn't gone down yet. Terrific swell 
on! They won't be able to get a boat near the island before tomorrow." 

Vera cried: 

"Another night in this place!" 

Lombard shrugged his shoulders. 

"May as well face it! Twentyfour hours will do it, I think. If we can last out that, 
we'll be all right." 

Blore cleared his throat. He said: 

"We'd better come to a clear understanding. What's happened to DrArmstrong?" 
Lombard said: 

"Well, we've got one piece of evidence. Only three little Indian boys left on the 
dinnertable. It looks as though DrArmstrong had got his quietus." 

Vera said: 

"Then why haven't you found his dead body?" 


Blore said: 



"Exactly." 

Lombard shook his head. He said: 

"It's damned odd no getting over it." 

Blore said doubtfully: 

"It might have been thrown into the sea." 

Lombard said sharply: 

"By whom? You? Me? You saw him go out of the front door. You come along 
and 

find me in my room. We go out and search together. When the devil had I time to 
kill him and carry his body round the island?" 

Blore said: 

"I don't know. But I do know one thing." 

Lombard said: 

"What's that?" 

Blore said: 

"The revolver. It was your revolver. It's in your possession now. There's nothing 
to show that it hasn't been in your possession all along." 

"Come now, Blore, we were all searched." 

"Yes, you'd hidden it away before that happened. Afterwards you just took it 
back again." 

"My good blockhead, I swear to you that it was put back in my drawer. Greatest 
surprise I ever had in my life when I found it there." 


Blore said: 



"You ask us to believe a thing like that! Why the devil should DrArmstrong, or any 
one else for that matter, put it back?" 

Lombard raised his shoulders hopelessly. 

"I haven't the least idea. It's just crazy. The last thing one would expect. There 
seems no point in it." 

Blore agreed. 

"No, there isn't. You might have thought of a better story." 

"Rather proof that I'm telling the truth, isn't it?" 

"I don't look at it that way." 

Philip said: 

"You wouldn't." 

Blore said: 

"Look here, Mr. Lombard, if you're an honest man, as you pretend " 

Philip murmured: 

"When did I lay claims to being an honest man? No, indeed, I never said that." 
Blore went on stolidly: 

"If you're speaking the truth there's only one thing to be done. As long as you 
have that revolver, Miss Claythorne and I are at your mercy. The only fair thing 

is to put that revolver with the other things that are locked up and you and I 

will hold the two keys still." 

Philip Lombard lit a cigarette. 

As he puffed smoke, he said: 



"Don't be an ass." 


"You won't agree to that?" 

"No, I won't. That revolver's mine. I need it to defend myself and I'm going to 
keep it." 

Blore said: 

"In that case we're bound to come to one conclusion." 

"That I'm U.N. Owen? Think what you damned well please. But I'll ask you, if 
that's so, why I didn't pot you with the revolver last night? I could have, about 
twenty times over." 

Blore shook his head. 

He said: 

"I don't know and that's a fact. You must have had some reason." 

Vera had taken no part in the discussion. She stirred now and said: 

"I think you're both behaving like a pair of idiots." 

Lombard looked at her. 

"What's this?" 

Vera said: 

"You've forgotten the nursery rhyme. Don't you see there's a clue there?" 

She recited in a meaning voice: 

"Four little Indian boys going out to sea; 

A red herring swallowed one and then there were three." 



She went on: 


"A red herring that's the vital clue. DrArmstrong's not dead... He took away the 
china Indian to make you think he was. You may say what you like DrArmstrong's 

on the island still. His disappearance is just a red herring across the track..." 

Lombard sat down again. 

He said: 

"You know, you may be right." 

Blore said: 

"Yes, but if so, where is he? We've searched the place. Outside and inside." 

Vera said scornfully: 

"We all searched for the revolver, didn't we, and couldn't find it? But it was 
somewhere all the time!" 

Lombard murmured: 

"There's a slight difference in size, my dear, between a man and a revolver." 
Vera said: 

"I don't care I'm sure I'm right." 

Blore murmured: 

"Rather giving himself away, wasn't it? Actually mentioning a red herring in the 
verse. He could have written it up a bit different." 

Vera cried: 

"But don't you see, he's mad? It's all mad! The whole thing of going by the 
rhyme is mad! Dressing up the JusticeWargrave, killing Rogers when he was chopping 
sticks 



drugging Mrs. Rogers so that she overslept herself arranging for a bumblebee 

when Miss Brent died! It's like some horrible child playing a game. It's all got to 
fit in." 

Blore said: 

"Yes, you're right." He thought a minute. "At any rate there's no Zoo on the 
island. He'll have a bit of trouble getting over that." 

Vera cried: 

"Don't you see? We're the Zoo... Last night, we were hardly human any more. 
We're the Zoo..." 

II 

They spent the morning on the cliffs, taking it in turns to flash a mirror at the 
mainland. 

There were no signs that any one saw them. No answering signals. The day was 

fine, with a slight haze. Below, the sea weaved in a gigantic swell. There were no 
boats out. 

They had made another abortive search of the island. There was no trace of the 
missing physician. 

Vera looked up at the house from where they were standing. 

She said, her breath coming with a slight catch in it: 

"One feels safer here, out in the open... Don't let's go back into the house again." 
Lombard said: 

"Not a bad idea. We're pretty safe here, no one can get at us without our seeing 
him a long time beforehand." 



Vera said: 


"We'll stay here." 

Blore said: 

"Have to pass the night somewhere. We'll have to go back to the house then." 
Vera shuddered, 

"I can't bear it. I can't go through another night!" 

Philip said: 

"You'll be safe enough locked in your room." 

Vera murmured: "I suppose so." 

She stretched out her hands, murmuring: 

"It's lovely to feel the sun again..." 

She thought: 

"How odd... I'm almost happy. And yet I suppose I'm actually in danger... 
Somehow now nothing seems to matter... not in daylight... I feel full of power 
I feel that I can't die..." 

Blore was looking at his wristwatch. He said: 

"It's two o'clock. What about lunch?" 

Vera said obstinately: 

"I'm not going back to the house. I'm going to stay here in the open." 

"Oh, come now, Miss Claythorne. Got to keep your strength up, you know." 


Vera said: 



"If I even see a tinned tongue, I shall be sick! I don't want any food. People go 
days on end with nothing sometimes when they're on a diet." 

Blore said: 

"Well, I need my meals regular. What about you, Mr. Lombard?" 

Philip said: 

"You know, I don't relish the idea of tinned tongue particularly. I'll stay here with 
Miss Claythorne." 

Blore hesitated. Vera said: 

"I shall be quite all right. I don't think he'll shoot me as soon as your back is 
turned if that's what you're afraid of." 

Blore said: 

"It's all right if you say so. But we agreed we ought not to separate." 

Philip said: 

"You're the one who wants to go into the lion's den. I'll come with you if you 
like?" 

"No, you won't," said Blore. "You'll stay here." 

Philip laughed. 

"So you're still afraid of me? Why, I could shoot you both this very minute if I 
liked." 

Blore said: 

"Yes, but that wouldn't be according to plan. It's one at a time, and it's got to be 
done in a certain way." 

"Well," said Philip, "you seem to know all about it." 

"Of course," said Blore, "it's a bit jumpy going up to the house alone " 



Philip said softly: 

"And therefore, will I lend you my revolver? Answer, no, I will not! Not quite so 
simple as that, thank you." 

Blore shrugged his shoulders and began to make his way up the steep slope to 
the house. 

Lombard said softly: 

"Feeding time at the Zoo! The animals are very regular in their habits!" 

Vera said anxiously: 

"Isn't it very risky, what he's doing?" 

"In a sense you mean no, I don't think it is! DrArmstrong's not armed, you know, 
and anyway Blore is twice a match for him in physique and he's very much on 
his 

guard. And anyway it's a sheer impossibility that DrArmstrong can be in the house. 
I know he's not there." 

"But what other solution is there?" 

Philip said softly: 

"There's Blore." 

"Oh do you really think ?" 

"Listen, my girl. You heard Blore's story. You've got to admit that if it's true, I 
can't possibly have had anything to do with DrArmstrong's disappearance. His 
story 

clears me. But it doesn't clear him. We've only his word for it that he heard 
footsteps and saw a man going downstairs and out at the front door. The whole 



thing may be a lie. He may have got rid of DrArmstrong a couple of hours before 
that." 

"How?" 

Lombard shrugged his shoulders. 

"That we don't know. But if you ask me, we've only one danger to fear and that 
danger is Blore! What do we know about the man? Less than nothing! All this 
expoliceman story may be bunkum! He may be anybody a mad millionaire a 
crazy business man an escaped inmate of Broadmoor. One thing's certain. He 

could have done every one of these crimes." 

Vera had gone rather white. She said in a slightly breathless voice: 

"And supposing he gets us?" 

Lombard said softly, patting the revolver in his pocket: 

"I'm going to take very good care he doesn't." 

Then he looked at her curiously. 

"Touching faith in me, haven't you, Vera? Quite sure I wouldn't shoot you?" 
Vera said: 

"One has got to trust some one... As a matter of fact I think you're wrong about 
Blore. I still think it's DrArmstrong." 

She turned to him suddenly. 

"Don't you feel all the time that there's some one. Some one watching and 
waiting?" 

Lombard said slowly: 

"That's just nerves." 


Vera said eagerly: 



"Then you have felt it?" 

She shivered. She bent a little closer. 

"Tell me you don't think " She broke off, went on: "I read a story once about two 
judges that came to a small American town from the Supreme Court. They 

administered justice Absolute Justice. Because they didn't come from this 

world at all..." 

Lombard raised his eyebrows. 

He said: 

"Heavenly visitants, eh? No, I don't believe in the supernatural. This business is 
human enough." 

Vera said in a low voice: 

"Sometimes I'm not sure..." 

Lombard looked at her. He said: 

"That's conscience..." After a moment's silence he said very quietly: "So you did 
drown that kid after all?" 

Vera said vehemently: 

"I didn't! I didn't! You've no right to say that!" 

He laughed easily. 

"Oh, yes, you did, my good girl! I don't know why. Can't imagine. There was a 
man in it probably. Was that it?" 

A sudden feeling of lassitude, of intense weariness, spread over Vera's limbs. She 
said in a dull voice: 


"Yes there was a man in it..." 



Lombard said softly: 

"Thanks. That's what I wanted to know..." 

Vera sat up suddenly. She exclaimed: 

"What was that? It wasn't an earthquake?" 

Lombard said: 

"No, no. Queer, though a thud shook the ground. And I thought did you hear a 
sort of cry? I did." 

They stared up at the house. 

Lombard said: 

"It came from there. We'd better go up and see." 

"No, no, I'm not going." 

"Please yourself. I am." 

Vera said desperately: 

"All right. I'll come with you." 

They walked up the slope to the house. The terrace was peaceful and 
innocuouslooking in the sunshine. They hesitated there a minute, then instead of 
entering by the front door, they made a cautious circuit of the house. 

They found Blore. He was spreadeagled on the stone terrace on the east side, his 

head crushed and mangled by a great block of white marble. 

Philip looked up. He said: 

"Whose is that window just above?" 


Vera said in a low shuddering voice: 



"It's mine and that's the clock from my mantelpiece... I remember now. It was 
shaped like a bear." 

She repeated and her voice shook and quavered: 

"It was shaped like a bear..." 

Ill 

Philip grasped her shoulder. 

He said, and his voice was urgent and grim: 

"This settles it. DrArmstrong is in hiding somewhere in that house. I'm going to get 
him." 

But Vera clung to him. She cried: 

"Don't be a fool. It's us now! We're next! He wants us to look for him! He's 
counting on it!" 

Philip stopped. He said thoughtfully: 

"There's something in that." 

Vera cried: 

"At any rate, you do admit now I was right." 

He nodded. 

"Yes you win! It's DrArmstrong all right. But where the devil did he hide himself? 
We went over the place with a finetooth comb." 

Vera said urgently: 

"If you didn't find him last night, you won't find him now... That's 
commonsense." 



Lombard said reluctantly: 

"Yes, but " 

"He must have prepared a secret place beforehand naturally of course it's just 
what he would do. You know, like a Priest's Hole in old manor houses." 

"This isn't an old house of that kind." 

"He could have had one made." 

Philip Lombard shook his head. 

He said: 

"We measured the place that first morning. I'll swear there's no space 
unaccounted for." 

Vera said: 

"There must be..." 

Lombard said: 

"I'd like to see " 

Vera cried: 

"Yes, you'd like to see! And he knows that! He's in there waiting for you." 
Lombard said, half bringing out the revolver from his pocket: 

"I've got this, you know." 

"You said Blore was all right that he was more than a match for DrArmstrong. So 
he was physically, and he was on the lookout too. But what you don't seem to 

realize is that DrArmstrong is mad! And a madman has all the advantages on his 

side. He's twice as cunning as any one sane can be." 



Lombard put back the revolver in his pocket. He said: 

"Come on, then." 

IV 

Lombard said at last: 

"What are we going to do when night comes?" 

Vera didn't answer. He went on accusingly: 

"You haven't thought of that?" 

She said helplessly: 

"What can we do? Oh, my God, I'm frightened..." 

Philip Lombard said thoughtfully: 

"It's fine weather. There will be a moon. We must find a place up by the top cliffs 
perhaps. We can sit there and wait for morning. We mustn't go to sleep... 

We must watch the whole time. And if any one comes up towards us, I shall 

shoot!" 

He paused: 

"You'll be cold, perhaps, in that thin dress?" 

Vera said with a raucous laugh: 

"Cold? I should be colder if I were dead!" 

Philip Lombard said quietly: 

"Yes, that's true..." 


Vera moved restlessly. 



She said: 


"I shall go mad if I sit here any longer. Let's move about." 

"All right." 

They paced slowly up and down, along the line of the rocks overlooking the sea. 
The sun was dropping towards the west. The light was golden and mellow. It 
enveloped them in a golden glow. 

Vera said, with a sudden nervous little giggle: 

"Pity we can't have a bathe..." 

Philip was looking down towards the sea. He said abruptly: 

"What's that, there? You see by that big rock? No a little further to the right." 
Vera stared. She said: 

"It looks like somebody's clothes!" 

"A bather, eh?" Lombard laughed. "Queer. I suppose it's only seaweed." 

Vera said: 

"Let's go and look." 

"It is clothes," said. Lombard as they drew nearer. "A bundle of them. That's a 
boot. Come on, let's scramble along here." 

They scrambled over the rocks. 

Vera stopped suddenly. She said: 

"It's not clothes it's a man..." 

The man was wedged between two rocks, flung there by the tide earlier in the 



day. 

Lombard and Vera reached it in a last scramble. They bent down. 
A purple discoloured face a hideous drowned face... 

Lombard said: 

"My God! It's DrArmstrong..." 



Chapter 16 

Aeons passed... worlds span and whirled... Time was motionless... It stood still 
it passed through a thousand ages... 

No, it was only a minute or so... 

Two people were standing looking down on a dead man... 

Slowly, very slowly, Vera Claythorne and Philip Lombard lifted their heads and 
looked into each other's eyes... 

II 

Lombard laughed. 

He said: 

"So that's it, is it, Vera?" 

Vera said: 

"There's no one on the island no one at all except us two..." 

Her voice was a whisper nothing more. 

Lombard said: 

"Precisely. So we know where we are, don't we?" 

Vera said: 

"How was it worked that trick with the marble bear?" 

He shrugged his shoulders. 

"A conjuring trick, my dear a very good one..." 



Their eyes met again. 

Vera thought: 

"Why did I never see his face properly before. A wolf that's what it is a wolf' 
face... Those horrible teeth..." 

Lombard said, and his voice was a snarl dangerous menacing: 

"This is the end, you understand. We've come to the truth now. And it's the 
end..." 

Vera said quietly: 

"I understand..." 

She stared out to sea. General Macarthur had stared out to sea when only 
yesterday? Or was it the day before? He too had said, "This is the end..." 

He had said it with acceptance almost with welcome. 

But to Vera the words the thought brought rebellion. 

No, it should not be the end. 

She looked down at the dead man. She said: 

"Poor  DrArmstrong..." 

Lombard sneered. 

He said: 

"What's this? Womanly pity?" 

Vera said: 


"Why not? Haven't you any pity?" 



He said: 


"I've no pity for you. Don't expect it!" 

Vera looked down again at the body. She said: 

"We must move him. Carry him up to the house." 

"To join the other victims, I suppose? All neat and tidy. As far as I'm concerned 
he can stay where he is." 

Vera said: 

"At any rate, let's get him out of reach of the sea." 

Lombard laughed. He said: 

"If you like." 

He bent tugging at the body. Vera leaned against him, helping him. She pulled 
and tugged with all her might. 

Lombard panted: 

"Not such an easy job." 

They managed it, however, drawing the body clear of the high water mark. 
Lombard said as he straightened up: 

"Satisfied?" 

Vera said: 

"Quite." 

Her tone warned him. He spun around. Even as he clapped his hand to his pocket 
he knew that he would find it empty. 

She had moved a yard or two and was facing him, revolver in hand. 



Lombard said: 


"So that's the reason for your womanly solicitude! You wanted to pick my 
pocket." 

She nodded. 

She held it steadily and unwaveringly. 

Death was very near to Philip Lombard now. It had never, he knew, been nearer. 
Nevertheless he was not beaten yet. 

He said authoritatively: 

"Give that revolver to me." 

Vera laughed. 

Lombard said: 

"Come on, hand it over." 

His quick brain was working. Which way which method talk her over lull her 
into security or a swift dash 

All his life Lombard had taken the risky way. He took it now. 

He spoke slowly, argumentatively. 

"Now look here, my dear girl, you just listen " 

And then he sprang. Quick as a panther as any other feline creature... 
Automatically Vera pressed the trigger... 

Lombard's leaping body stayed poised in midspring, then crashed heavily to the 
ground. 



Vera came warily forward, the revolver ready in her hand. 

But there was no need of caution. 

Philip Lombard was dead shot through the heart... 

III 

Relief possessed Vera enormous exquisite relief. 

At last it was over. 

There was no more fear no more steeling of her nerves... 

She was alone on the island... 

Alone with nine dead bodies... 

But what did that matter? She was alive... 

She sat there exquisitely happy exquisitely at peace... 

No more fear... 

IV 

The sun was setting when Vera moved at last. Sheer reaction had kept her 
immobile. There had been no room in her for anything but the glorious sense of 
safety. 

She realized now that she was hungry and sleepy. Principally sleepy. She wanted 
to throw herself on her bed and sleep and sleep and sleep... 

Tomorrow, perhaps, they would come and rescue her but she didn't really mind. 
She didn't mind staying here. Not now that she was alone... 

Oh! blessed, blessed peace... 



She got to her feet and glanced up at the house. 

Nothing to be afraid of any longer! No terrors waiting for her! Just an ordinary 
wellbuilt modern house. And yet, a little earlier in the day, she had not been 
able to look at it without shivering... 

Fear what a strange thing fear was... 

Well, it was over now. She had conquered had triumphed over the most deadly 
peril. By her own quickwittedness and adroitness she had turned the tables on 

her wouldbe destroyer. 

She began to walk up towards the house. 

The sun was setting, the sky to the west was streaked with red and orange. It 
was beautiful and peaceful... 

Vera thought: 

"The whole thing might be a dream..." 

How tired she was terribly tired. Her limbs ached, her eyelids were drooping. 
Not to be afraid any more... To sleep. Sleep... sleep... sleep... 

To sleep safely since she was alone on the island. One little Indian boy left all 
alone. 

She smiled to herself. 

She went in at the front door. The house, too, felt strangely peaceful. 

Vera thought: 

"Ordinarily one wouldn't care to sleep where there's a dead body in practically 
every bedroom!" 



Should she go the kitchen and get herself something to eat? 

She hesitated a moment, then decided against it. She was really too tired... 

She paused by the diningroom door. There were still three little china figures in 
the middle of the table. 

Vera laughed. 

She said: 

"You're behind the times, my dears." 

She picked up two of them and tossed them out through the window. She heard 
them crash on the stone of the terrace. 

The third little figure she picked up and held in her hand. She said: 

"You can come with me. We've won, my dear! We've won!" 

The hall was dim in the dying light. 

Vera, the little Indian clasped in her hand, began to mount the stairs. Slowly, 
because her legs were suddenly very tired. 

"One little Indian boy left all alone." How did it end? Oh, yes! "He got married 
and then there were none." 

Married... Funny, how she suddenly got the feeling again that Hugo was in the 
house... 

Very strong. Yes, Hugo was upstairs waiting for her. 

Vera said to herself: 

"Don't be a fool. You're so tired that you're imagining the most fantastic 
things..." 



Slowly up the stairs... 

At the top of them something fell from her hand, making hardly any noise on the 
soft pile carpet. She did not notice that she had dropped the revolver. She was 
only conscious of clasping a little china figure. 

How very quiet the house was. And yet it didn't seem like an empty house... 
Hugo, upstairs, waiting for her... 

"One little Indian boy left all alone... What was the last line again? Something 
about being married or was it something else? 

She had come now to the door of her room. Hugo was waiting for her inside she 
was quite sure of it. 

She opened the door... 

She gave a gasp... 

What was that hanging from the hook in the ceiling? A rope with a noose all 

ready? And a chair to stand upon a chair that could be kicked away... 

That was what Hugo wanted... 

And of course that was the last line of the rhyme. 

"He went and hanged himself and then there were none... 

The little china figure fell from her hand. It rolled unheeded and broke against 
the fender. 

Like an automaton Vera moved forward. This was the end here where the cold 
wet hand (Cyril's hand, of course) had touched her throat... 

"You can go to the rock, Cyril..." 



That was what murder was as easy as that! 

But afterwards you went on remembering... 

She climbed up on the chair, her eyes staring in front of her like a 
sleepwalker's... 

She adjusted the noose round her neck. 

Hugo was there to see she did what she had to do. 

She kicked away the chair... 



Epilogue 

Sir Thomas Legge, Assistant Commissioner at Scotland Yard, said irritably: 


"But the whole thing's incredible!" 

Inspector Maine said respectfully: 

"I know, sir." 

The A.C. went on: 

"Ten people dead on an island and not a living soul on it. It doesn't make sense!" 
Inspector Maine said stolidly: 

"Nevertheless, it happened, sir." 

Sir Thomas Legge said: 

"Damn it all, Maine, somebody must have killed 'em." 

"That's just our problem, sir." 

"Nothing helpful in the doctor's report?" 

"No, sir. JusticeWargrave and Lombard were shot, the first through the head, the second 
through the heart. Miss Brent and Marston died of cyanide poisoning, 

Mrs. Rogers died of an overdose of chloral. Rogers' head was split open. Blore's 

head was crushed in. DrArmstrong died of drowning. Macarthur's skull was 
fractured by a blow on the back of the head and Vera Claythorne was hanged." 

The A.C. winced. He said: 

"Nasty business all of it." 

He considered for a minute or two. He said irritably: 



"Do you mean to say that you haven't been able to get anything helpful out of the 
Sticklehaven people. Dash it, they must know something." 

Inspector Maine shrugged his shoulders. 

"They're ordinary decent seafaring folk. They know that the island was bought 
by a man called Owen and that's about all they do know." 

"Who provisioned the island and made all the necessary arrangements?" 

"Man called Morris. Isaac Morris." 

"And what does he say about it all?" 

"He can't say anything, sir, he's dead." 

The A.C. frowned. 

"Do we know anything abut this Morris?" 

"Oh, yes, sir, we know about him. He wasn't a very savoury gentleman, Mr. 
Morris. He was implicated in that sharepushing fraud of Bennito's three years 
ago we're sure of that though we can't prove it. And he was mixed up in the 
dope business. And again we can't prove it. He was a very careful man, Morris." 
"And he was behind this island business?" 

"Yes, sir, he put through the sale though he made it clear that he was buying 
Indian Island for a third party, unnamed." 

"Surely there's something to be found out on the financial angle, there?" 
Inspector Maine smiled. 

"Not if you knew Morris! He can wangle figures until the best chartered 
accountant in the country wouldn't know if he was on his head or his heels! 

We've 



had a taste of that in the Bennito business. No, he covered his employer's tracks 
all right. " 

The other man sighed. Inspector Maine went on: 

"It was Morris who made all the arrangements down at Sticklehaven, 
Represented himself as acting for 'Mr. Owen.' And it was he who explained to 
the 

people down there that there was some experiment on some bet about living on 

a 'desert island' for a week and that no notice was to be taken of any appeal for 
help from out there." 

Sir Thomas Legge stirred uneasily. He said: 

"And you're telling me that those people didn't smell a rat? Not even then?" 
Maine shrugged his shoulders. He said: 

"You're forgetting, sir, that Indian Island previously belonged to young Elmer 
Robson, the American. He had the most extraordinary parties down there. I've no 

doubt the local people's eyes fairly popped out over them. But they got used to it 
and they'd begun to feel that anything to do with Indian Island would necessarily 

be incredible. It's natural, that, sir, when you come to think of it." 

The Assistant Commissioner admitted gloomily that he supposed it was. 

Maine said: 

"Fred Narracott that's the man who took the party out there did say one thing that 
was illuminating. He said he was surprised to see what sort of people these 

were. 'Not at all like Mr. Robson's parties.' I think it was the fact that they were 
all so normal and so quiet that made him override Morris' orders and take out a 

boat to the island after he'd heard about the SOS signals." 



"When did he and the other men go?" 

"The signals were seen by a party of boy scouts on the morning of the 11th. 
There was no possibility of getting out there that day. The men got there on the 
afternoon of the 12th at the first moment possible to run a boat ashore there. 

They're all quite positive that nobody could have left the island before they got 

there. There was a big sea on after the storm." 

"Couldn't some one have swum ashore?" 

"It's over a mile to the coast and there were heavy seas and big breakers inshore. 
And there were a lot of people, boy scouts and others on the cliffs looking out 
towards the island and watching." 

The A.C. sighed. He said: 

"What about the gramophone record you found in the house? Couldn't you get 
hold of anything there that might help?" 

Inspector Maine said: 

"I've been into that. It was supplied by a firm that do a lot of theatrical stuff and 
film effects. It was sent to U.N. Owen, Esq. c/o Isaac Morris, and was 
understood 

to be required for the amateur performance of a hitherto unacted play. The 
typescript of it was returned with the record." 

Legge said: 

"And what about the subject matter, eh?" 

Inspector Maine said gravely: 

"I'm coming to that, sir." 



He cleared his throat. 


"I've investigated those accusations as thoroughly as I can. 

"Starting with the Rogerses who were the first to arrive on the island. They were 
in service with a Miss Brady who died suddenly. Can't get anything definite out 

of the doctor who attended her. He says they certainly didn't poison her, or 

anything like that, but his personal belief if that there was some funny business 

that she died as the result of neglect on their part. Says it's the sort of thing 

that's quite impossible to prove. 

"Then there is Mr.  JusticeWargrave. That's O.K. He was the judge who 
sentenced Seton. 

"By the way, Seton was guilty unmistakably guilty. Evidence turned up later 
after he was hanged which proved that beyond any shadow of doubt. But there 

was a good deal of comment at the time nine people out of ten thought Seton 

was innocent and that the judge's summing up had been vindictive. 

"The Claythorne girl, I find, was governess in a family where a death occurred 
by drowning. However, she doesn't seem to have had anything to do with it, and 
as a 

matter of fact she behaved very well, swam out to the rescue and was actually 
carried out to sea and only just rescued in time." 

"Go on," said the A.C. with a sigh. 

Maine took a deep breath. 

" DrArmstrong now. Wellknown man. Had a consulting room in Harley Street. 
Absolutely straight and aboveboard in his profession. Haven't been able to trace 



any record of an illegal operation or anything of that kind. It's true that there 
was a woman called Clees who was operated on by him way back in 1925 at 
Leithmore, when he was attached to the hospital there. Peritonitis and she died 
on the operating table. Maybe he wasn't very skillful over the op. after all he 
hadn't much experience but after all clumsiness isn't a criminal offence. There 
was certainly no motive. 

"Then there's Miss Emily Brent. Girl, Beatrice Taylor, was in service with her. 
Got pregnant, was turned out by her mistress and went and drowned herself. Not 
a nice business but again not criminal." 

"That," said the A.C., "seems to be the point. U.N. Owen dealt with cases that 
the law couldn't touch." 

Maine went stolidly on with his list. 

"Young Marston was a fairly reckless car driver had his license endorsed twice 
and he ought to have been prohibited from driving, in my opinion. That's all 

there is to him. The two names John and Lucy Combes were those of two kids 
he 

knocked down and killed near Cambridge. Some friends of his gave evidence for 
him and he was let off with a fine. 

"Can't find anything definite about General Macarthur. Fine record war service 
all the rest of it. Arthur Richmond was serving under him in France and was 
killed in action. No friction of any kind between him and the General. They were 
close friends, as a matter of fact. There were some blunders made about that time 
commanding officers sacrificed men unnecessarily possibly this was a blunder 



of that kind." 


"Possibly," said the A.C. 

"Now, Philip Lombard. Lombard has been mixed up in some very curious shows 

abroad. He's sailed very near the law once or twice. Got a reputation for daring 

and for not being over scrupulous. Sort of fellow who might do several murders 
in 

some quiet outoftheway spot. 

"Then we come to Blore." Maine hesitated. "He of course was one of our lot." 
The other man stirred. 

"Blore," said the Assistant Commissioner forcibly, "was a bad hat!" 

"You think so, sir?" 

The A.C. said: 

"I always thought so. But he was clever enough to get away with it. It's my 

opinion that he committed black perjury in the Landor case. I wasn't happy about 

it at the time. But I couldn't find anything. I put Hams onto it and he couldn't 

find anything but I'm still of the opinion that there was something to find if we'd 
known how to set about it. The man wasn't straight." 

There was a pause, then Sir Thomas Legge said: 

"And Isaac Morris is dead, you say? When did he die?" 

"I thought you'd soon come to that, sir. Isaac Morris died on the night of August 
8th. Took an overdose of sleeping stuff one of the barbiturates, I understand. 

There wasn't anything to show whether it was accident or suicide." 



Legge said slowly: 

"Care to know what I think, Maine?" 

"Perhaps I can guess, sir." 

Legge said heavily: 

"That death of Morris' is a damned sight too opportune!" 

Inspector Maine nodded. He said: 

"I thought you'd say that, sir." 

The Assistant Commissioner brought down his fist with a bang on the table. He 
cried out: 

"The whole thing's fantastic impossible. Ten people killed on a bare rock of an 
island and we don't know who did it, or why, or how." 

Maine coughed. He said: 

"Well, it's not quite like that, sir. We do know why, more or less. Some fanatic 
with a bee in his bonnet about justice. He was out to get people who were 
beyond 

the reach of the law. He picked ten people whether they were really guilty or 
not doesn't matter " 

The Commissioner stirred. He said sharply: 

"Doesn't it? It seems to me " 

He stopped. Inspector Maine waited respectfully. With a sigh Legge shook his 
head. 

"Carry on," he said. "Just for a minute I felt I'd got somewhere. Got, as it were, 
the clue to the thing. It's gone now. Go ahead with what you were saying." 



Maine went on: 


"There were ten people to be executed, let's say. They were executed. U.N. 

Owen accomplished his task. And somehow or other he spirited himself off that 
island 

into thin air." 

The A.C. said: 

"Firstclass vanishing trick. But you know, Maine, there must be an explanation." 
Maine said: 

"You're thinking, sir, that if the man wasn't on the island, he couldn'l have left 
the island, and according to the account of the interested parties he never was on 
the island. Well, then the only explanation possible is that he was actually one of 
the ten." 

The A.C. nodded. 

Maine said earnestly: 

"We thought of that, sir. We went into it. Now, to begin with, we're not quite in 
the dark as to what happened on Indian Island. Vera Claythorne kept a diary, so 

did Emily Brent. Old JusticeWargrave made some notes dry legal cryptic stuff, but 

quite clear. And Blore made notes too. All those accounts tally. The deaths 
occurred in this order: Marston, Mrs. Rogers, Macarthur, Rogers, Miss Brent, 

JusticeWargrave. After his death Vera Claythorne's diary states that DrArmstrong left the 

house in the night and that Blore and Lombard had gone after him. Blore has 

one more entry in his notebook. Just two words: 'DrArmstrong disappeared.' 

"Now, sir, it seemed to me, taking everything into account, that we might find 
here a perfectly good solution. DrArmstrong was drowned, you remember. 
Granting 



that DrArmstrong was mad, what was to prevent him having killed off all the 
others and then committed suicide by throwing himself over the cliff, or perhaps 
while trying to swim to the mainland? 

"That was a good solution but it won't do. No, sir, it won't do. First of all there's 
the police surgeon's evidence. He got to the island early on the morning of 
August 13th. He couldn't say much to help us. All he could say was that all the 
people 

had been dead at least thirtysix hours and probably a good deal longer. But he 
was fairly definite about DrArmstrong. Said he must have been from eight to ten 
hours in the water before his body was washed up. That works out at this, that 
DrArmstrong must have gone into the sea sometime during the night of the 10th 
11th and I'll explain why. We found the point where the body was washed up 
it had been wedged between two rocks and there were bits of cloth, hair, etc. on 
them. It must have been deposited there at high water on the 11th that's to say 
round about 11 o'clock A.M. After that, the storm subsided, and succeeding high 
water marks are considerably lower. 

"You might say, I suppose that DrArmstrong managed to polish off the other three 
before he went into the sea that night. But there's another point and one you 

can't get over. DrArmstrong's body had been dragged above high water mark. We 

found it well above the reach of any tide. And it was laid out straight on the 

ground all neat and tidy. 

"So that settles one point definitely. Some one was alive on the island after 
DrArmstrong was dead." 



He paused and then went on. 

"And that leaves just what exactly? Here's the position early on the morning of 
the 11th. DrArmstrong has 'disappeared' (drowned). That leaves us three people. 

Lombard, Blore and Vera Claythorne. Lombard was shot. His body was down by 

the sea near DrArmstrong's. Vera Claythorne was found hanged in her own 
bedroom. Blore's body was on the terrace. His head was crushed in by a heavy 

marble clock that it seems reasonable to suppose fell on him from the window 

above." 

The A.C. said sharply: 

"Whose window?" 

"Vera Claythorne's. Now, sir, let's take each of these cases separately. First Philip 
Lombard. Let's say he pushed over that lump of marble onto Blore then 

he doped Vera Claythorne and strung her up. Lastly, he went down to the 
seashore and shot himself. 

"But if so, woo took away the revolver from him? For that revolver was found 
up in the house just inside the door at the top of the stairs JusticeWargrave's room." 

The A.C. said: 

"Any fingerprints on it?" 

"Yes, sir, Vera Claythorne's." 

"But, man alive, then " 

"I know what you're going to say, sir. That it was Vera Claythorne. That she shot 
Lombard, took the revolver back to the house, toppled the marble block onto 

Blore and then hanged herself. 

"And that's quite all right up to a point. There's a chair in her bedroom and on the 



seat of it there are marks of seaweed same as on her shoes. Looks as though 
she stood on the chair, adjusted the rope round her neck and kicked away the 
chair. 

"But that chair wasn't found kicked over. It was, like, all the other chairs, neatly 
put back against the wall. That was done after Vera Claythorne's death by some 

one else. 

"That leaves us with Blore and if you tell me that after shooting Lombard and 
inducing Vera Claythorne to hang herself he then went out and pulled down a 

whacking great block of marble on himself by tying a string to it or something 

like that well, I simply don't believe you. Men don't commit suicide that way 

and what's more Blore wasn't that kind of man. We knew Blore and he was not 
the man that you'd ever accuse of a desire for abstract justice." 

The Assistant Commissioner said: 

"I agree." 

Inspector Maine said: 

"And therefore, sir, there must have been some one else on the island. Some one 
who tidied up when the whole business was over. But where was he all the time 

and where did he go to? The Sticklehaven people are absolutely certain that no 

one could have left the island before the rescue boat got there. But in that case " 

He stopped. 

The Assistant Commissioner said: 

"In that case " 

He sighed. He shook his head. He leaned forward. 



"But in that case," he said, "who killed them?" 

A MANUSCRIPT DOCUMENT SENT TO SCOTLAND YARD BY THE 
MASTER 

OF THE EMMA , FISHING TRAWLER 

From my earliest youth I realized that my nature was a mass of contradictions. I 

have to begin with, an incurably romantic imagination. The practice of throwing 

a bottle into the sea with an important document inside was one that never failed 
to thrill me when reading adventure stories as a child. It thrills me still and for 
that reason I have adopted this course writing my confession, enclosing it in a 

bottle, sealing the latter, and casting it into the waves. There is, I suppose, a 

hundred to one chance that my confession may be found and then (or do I flatter 

myself!) a hitherto unsolved murder mystery will be explained. 

I was born with other traits besides my romantic fancy. I have a definite sadistic 
delight in seeing or causing death. I remember experiments with wasps with 

various garden pests... From an early age I knew very strongly the lust to kill. 

But side by side with this went a contradictory trait a strong sense of justice. It is 
abhorrent to me that an innocent person or creature should suffer or die by any 
act of mine. I have always felt strongly that right should prevail. 

It may be understood I think a psychologist would understand that with my 

mental makeup being what it was, I adopted the law as a profession. The legal 

profession satisfied nearly all my instincts. 

Crime and its punishment has always fascinated me. I enjoy reading every kind 
of detective story and thriller. I have devised for my own private amusement the 
most ingenious ways of carrying out a murder. 



When in due course I came to preside over a court of law, that other secret 

instinct of mine was encouraged to develop. To see a wretched criminal 
squirming in the dock, suffering the tortures of the damned, as his doom came 

slowly and slowly nearer, was to me an exquisite pleasure. Mind you, I took no 

pleasure in seeing an innocent man there. On at least two occasions I stopped 

cases where to my mind the accused was palpably innocent, directing the jury 

that there was no case. Thanks, however, to the fairness and efficiency of our 

police force, the majority of the accused persons who have come before me to be 
tried for murder, have been guilty. 

I will say here that such was the case with the man Edward Seton. His 
appearance and manner were misleading and he created a good impression on 

the jury. But not only the evidence, which was clear, though unspectacular, but 

my own knowledge of criminals told me without any doubt that the man had 

actually committed the crime with which he was charged, the brutal murder of 

an elderly woman who trusted him. 

I have a reputation as a hanging judge, but that is unfair. I have always been 
strictly just and scrupulous in my summing up of a case. 

All I have done is to protect the jury against the emotional effect of emotional 
appeals by some of our more emotional counsel. I have drawn their attention to 
the actual evidence. 

For some years past I have been aware of a change within myself, a lessening of 
control a desire to act instead of to judge. 



I have wanted let me admit it frankly to commit a murder myself. I recognized 

this as the desire of the artist to express himself! I was, or could be, an artist in 
crime! My imagination, sternly checked by the exigencies of my profession, 
waxed 

secretly to colossal force. 

I must I must I must commit a murder! And what is more, it must be no 

ordinary murder! It must be a fantastical crime something stupendous out of 

the common! In that one respect, I have still, I think, an adolescent's 
imagination. 

I wanted something theatrical, impossible! 

I wanted to kill... Yes, I wanted to kill... 

But incongruous as it may seem to some I was restrained and hampered by my 
innate sense of justice. The innocent must not suffer. 

And then, quite suddenly, the idea came to me started by a chance remark 
uttered during casual conversation. It was a doctor to whom I was talking some 
ordinary undistinguished G.P. He mentioned casually how often murder must be 
committed which the law was unable to touch. 

And he instanced a particular case that of an old lady, a patient of his who had 
recently died. He was, he said, himself convinced that her death was due to the 

withholding of a restorative drug by a married couple who attended on her and 

who stood to benefit very substantially by her death. That sort of thing, he 
explained, was quite impossible to prove, but he was nevertheless quite sure of it 
in his own mind. He added that there were many cases of a similar nature going 

on all the time cases of deliberate murder and all quite untouchable by the 



law. 


That was the beginning of the whole thing. I suddenly saw my way clear. And I 

determined to commit not one murder, but murder on a grand scale. 

A childish rhyme of my infancy came back into my mind the rhyme of the ten 

little Indian boys. It had fascinated me as a child of two the inexorable 
diminishment the sense of inevitability. 

I began, secretly, to collect victims... 

I will not take up space here by going into detail of how this was accomplished. I 
had a certain routine line of conversation which I employed with nearly every 
one 

I met and the results I got were really surprising. During the time I was in a 
nursing home I collected the case of  DrArmstrong a violently teetotal sister 

who attended on me being anxious to prove to me the evils of drink by 
recounting 

to me a case many years ago in hospital when a doctor under the influence of 

alcohol had killed a patient on whom he was operating. A careless question as to 

where the sister in question had trained, etc., soon gave me the necessary data. I 
tracked down the doctor and the patient mentioned without difficulty. 

A conversation between two old military gossips in my Club put me on the track 

of General Macarthur. A man who had recently returned from the Amazon gave 

me a devastating resume of the activities of one Philip Lombard. An indignant 

mem sahib in Majorca recounted the tale of the Puritan Emily Brent and her 

wretched servant girl. Anthony Marston I selected from a large group of people 

who had committed similar offences. His complete callousness and his inability 



to 

feel any responsibility for the lives he had taken made him, I considered, a type 

dangerous to the community and unfit to live. Exinspector Blore came my way 

quite naturally, some of my professional brethren discussing the Landor case 

with freedom and vigour. I took a serious view of his offence. The police, as 

servants of the law, must be of a high order of integrity. For their word is 
perforce believed by virtue of their profession. 

Finally there was the case of Vera Claythorne. It was when I was crossing the 

Atlantic. At a late hour one night the sole occupants of the smokingroom were 

myself and a goodlooking young man called Hugo Hamilton. 

Hugo Hamilton was unhappy. To assuage that unhappiness he had taken a 

considerable quantity of drink. He was in the maudlin confidential stage. 

Without much hope of any result I automatically started my routine 
conversational gambit. The response was startling. I can remember his words 

now. He said: 

"You're right. Murder isn't what most people think giving some one a dollop of 
arsenic pushing them over a cliff that sort of stuff." He leaned forward, thrusting 
his face into mine. He said: "I've known a murderess known her, I tell you. And 
what's more I was crazy about her... God help me, sometimes I think I 

still am... It's Hell, I tell you Hell You see, she did it more or less for me... Not 
that I ever dreamed. Women are fiends absolute fiends you wouldn't think a 

girl like that a nice straight jolly girl you wouldn't think she'd do that, would 
you? That she'd take a kid out to sea and let it drown you wouldn't think a 


woman could do a thing like that?" 



I said to him: 


"Are you sure she did do it?" 

He said and in saying it he seemed suddenly to sober up: 

"I'm quite sure. Nobody else ever thought of it. But I knew the moment I looked 
at her when I got back after... And she knew I knew... What she didn't realize 
was that I loved that kid..." 

He didn't say any more, but it was easy enough for me to trace back the story and 
reconstruct it. 

I needed a tenth victim. I found him in a man named Morris. He was a shady 

little creature. Amongst other things he was a dope pedlar and he was 
responsible for inducing the daughter of friends of mine to take to drugs. She 

committed suicide at the age of twentyone. 

During all this time of search my plan had been gradually maturing in my mind. 

It was now complete and the coping stone to it was an interview I had with a 

doctor in Harley Street. I have mentioned that I underwent an operation. My 

interview in Harley Street told me that another operation would be useless. My 
medical adviser wrapped up the information very prettily, but I am accustomed 

to getting at the truth of a statement. 

I did not tell the doctor of my decision that my death should not be a slow and 
protracted one as it would be in the course of nature. No, my death should take 
place in a blaze of excitement. I would live before I died. 

And now to the actual mechanics of the crime of Indian Island. To acquire the 
island, using the man Morris to cover my tracks, was easy enough. He was an 



expert in that sort of thing. Tabulating the information I had collected about my 
prospective victims, I was able to concoct a suitable bait for each. None of my 
plans miscarried. All my guests arrived at Indian Island on the 8th of August. 
The party included myself. 

Morris was already accounted for. He suffered from indigestion. Before leaving 

London I gave him a capsule to take last thing at night which had, I said, done 

wonders for my own gastric juices. He accepted it unhesitatingly the man was a 

slight hypochondriac. I had no fear that he would leave any compromising 
documents or memoranda behind. He was not that sort of man. 

The order of death upon the island had been subjected by me to special thought 

and care. There were, I considered, amongst my guests, varying degrees of guilt. 

Those whose guilt was the lightest should, I decided, pass out first, and not 
suffer the prolonged mental strain and fear that the more coldblooded offenders 
were 

to suffer. 

Anthony Marston and Mrs. Rogers died first, the one instantaneously, the other 

in a peaceful sleep. Marston, I recognized, was a type born without that feeling 
of moral responsibility which most of us have. He was amoral pagan. Mrs. 
Rogers, 

I had no doubt, had acted very largely under the influence of her husband. 

I need not describe closely how those two met their deaths. The police will have 
been able to work that out quite easily. Potassium Cyanide is easily obtained by 

householders for putting down wasps. I had some in my possession and it was 

easy to slip it into Marston's almost empty glass during the tense period after the 



gramophone recital. 

I may say that I watched the faces of my guests closely during that indictment 
and I had no doubt whatever, after my long court experience, that one and all 
were guilty. 

During recent bouts of pain, I had been ordered a sleeping draught Chloral 

Hydrate. It had been easy for me to suppress this until I had a lethal amount in 

my possession. When Rogers brought up some brandy for his wife, he set it 
down 

on a table and in passing that table I put the stuff into the brandy. It was easy, for 
at that time suspicion had not begun to set in. 

General Macarthur met his death quite painlessly. He did not hear me come up 
behind him. I had, of course, to choose my time for leaving the terrace very 
carefully, but everything was successful. 

As I had anticipated, a search was made of the island and it was discovered that 
there was no one on it but our seven selves. That at once created an atmosphere 
of suspicion. According to my plan I should shortly need an ally. I selected  
DrArmstrong for that part. He was a gullible sort of man, he knew me by sight and 
reputation and it was inconceivable to him that a man of my standing should 
actually be a murderer! All his suspicions were directed against Lombard and I 
pretended to concur in these. I hinted to him that I had a scheme by which it 
might be possible to trap the murderer into incriminating himself. 

Though a search had been made of every one's room, no search had as yet been 



made of the persons themselves. But that was bound to come soon. 

I killed Rogers on the morning of August 10th. He was chopping sticks for 
lighting the fire and did not hear me approach. I found the key to the diningroom 
door in his pocket. He had locked it the night before. 

In the confusion attending the finding of Rogers' body I slipped into Lombard's 

room and abstracted his revolver. I knew that he would have one with him in 

fact, I had instructed Morris to suggest as much when he interviewed him. 

At breakfast I slipped my last dose of chloral into Miss Brent's coffee when I 
was refilling her cup. We left her in the diningroom. I slipped in there a little 
while later she was nearly unconscious and it was easy to inject a strong solution 
of 

cyanide into her. The bumblebee business was really rather childish but 
somehow, you know, it pleased me. I liked adhering as closely as possible to my 

nursery rhyme. 

Immediately after this what I had already foreseen happened indeed I believe I 
suggested it myself. We all submitted to a rigorous search. I had safely hidden 
away the revolver, and had no more cyanide or chloral in my possession. 

It was then that I intimated to DrArmstrong that we must carry our plan into 
effect. It was simply this I must appear to be the next victim. That would 
perhaps rattle the murderer at any rate once I was supposed to be dead I could 
move about the house and spy upon the unknown murderer. 

DrArmstrong was keen on the idea. We carried it out that evening. A little plaster 
of red mud on the forehead the red curtain and the wool and the stage was set. 
The lights of the candles were very flickering and uncertain and the only person 



who would examine me closely was DrArmstrong. 


It worked perfectly. Miss Claythorne screamed the house down when she found 
the seaweed which I had thoughtfully arranged in her room. They all rushed up, 

and I took up my pose of a murdered man. 

The effect on them when they found me was all that could be desired. DrArmstrong 

acted his part in the most professional manner. They carried me upstairs and 

laid me on my bed. Nobody worried about me, they were all too deadly scared 
and 

terrified of each other. 

I had a rendezvous with DrArmstrong outside the house at a quarter to two. I took 

him up a little way behind the house on the edge of the cliff. I said that here we 
could see if any one else approached us, and we should not be seen from the 

house as the bedrooms faced the other way. He was still quite unsuspicious and 

yet he ought to have been warned If he had only remembered the words of the 

nursery rhyme, "A red herring swallowed one..." He took the red herring all 
right. 

It was quite easy. I uttered an exclamation, leant over the cliff, told him to look, 
wasn't that the mouth of a cave? He leant right over. A quick vigorous push sent 

him off his balance and splash into the heaving sea below. I returned to the 

house. It must have been my footfall that Blore heard. A few minutes after I had 

returned to DrArmstrong's room I left it, this time making a certain amount of noise 
so that some one should hear me. I heard a door open as I got to the bottom of 
the stairs. They must have just glimpsed my figure as I went out of the front 
door. 


It was a minute or two before they followed me. I had gone straight round the 



house and in at the diningroom window which I had left open. I shut the window 
and later I broke the glass. Then I went upstairs and laid myself out again on my 
bed. 


I calculated that they would search the house again, but I did not think they 
would look closely at any of the corpses, a mere twitch aside of the sheet to 

satisfy themselves that it was not DrArmstrong masquerading as a body. This is 

exactly what occurred. 

I forgot to say that I returned the revolver to Lombard's room. It may be of 
interest to some one to know where it was hidden during the search. There was a 
big pile of tinned food in the larder. I opened the bottom most of the tins 
biscuits I think it contained, bedded in the revolver and replaced the strip of 
adhesive tape. 

I calculated, and rightly, that no one would think of working their way through a 

pile of apparently untouched foodstuffs, especially as all the top tins were 
soldered. 

The red curtain I had concealed by laying it flat on the seat of one of the 
drawingroom chairs under the chintz cover and the wool in the seat cushion, 
cutting a small hole. 

And now came the moment that I had anticipated three people who were so 
frightened of each other that anything might happen and one of them had a 
revolver. I watched them from the windows of the house. When Blore came up 
alone I had the big marble clock poised ready. Exit Blore... 

From my window I saw Vera Claythorne shoot Lombard. A daring and 



resourceful young woman. I always thought she was a match for him and more. 

As soon as that had happened I set the stage in her bedroom. 

It was an interesting psychological experiment. Would the consciousness of her 

own guilt, the state of nervous tension consequent on having just shot a man, be 

sufficient, together with the hypnotic suggestion of the surroundings, to cause 

her to take her own life? I thought it would. I was right. Vera Claythorne hanged 
herself before my eyes where I stood in the shadow of the wardrobe. 

And now for the last stage. I came forward, picked up the chair and set it against 
the wall. I looked for the revolver and found it at the top of the stairs where the 
girl had dropped it I was careful to preserve her fingerprints on it. 

And now? 

I shall finish writing this. I shall enclose it and seal it in a bottle and I shall throw 
the bottle into the sea. 

Why? 

Yes, why?... 

It was my ambition to invent a murder mystery that no one could solve. 

But no artist, I now realize, can be satisfied with art alone. There is a natural 
craving for recognition which cannot be gainsaid. 

I have, let me confess it in all humility, a pitiful human wish that some one 
should know just how clever I have been... 

In all this, I have assumed that the mystery of Indian Island will remain 
unsolved. It may be, of course, that the police will be cleverer than I think. There 
are, after all, three clues. One: the police are perfectly aware that Edward Seton 
was guilty. They know, therefore, that one of the ten people on the island was not 
a murderer in any sense of the word, and it follows, paradoxically, that that 



person must logically be the murderer. The second clue lies in the seventh verse 
of the nursery rhyme. DrArmstrong's death is associated with a "red herring" which 


he swallowed or rather which resulted in swallowing him! That is to say that at 
that stage of the affair some hocuspocus is clearly indicated and that DrArmstrong 
was deceived by it and sent to his death. That might start a promising 

line of inquiry. For at that period there are only four persons and of those four I 
am clearly the only one likely to inspire him with confidence. 

The third is symbolical. The manner of my death marking me on the forehead. 

The brand of Cain. 

There is, I think, little more to say. 

After entrusting my bottle and its message to the sea I shall go to my room and 

lay myself down on the bed. To my eyeglasses is attached what seems a length 
of 

fine black cord but it is elastic cord. I shall lay the weight of the body on the 
glasses. The cord I shall loop round the doorhandle and attach it, not too solidly, 
to the revolver. What I think will happen is this: 

My hand, protected with a handkerchief, will press the trigger. My hand will fall 

to my side, the revolver, pulled by the elastic will recoil to the door, jarred by the 
doorhandle it will detach itself from the elastic and fall. The elastic, released, 
will hang down innocently from the eyeglasses on which my body is lying. A 

handkerchief lying on the floor will cause no comment whatever. 

I shall be found, laid neatly on my bed, shot through the forehead in accordance 

with the record kept by my fellow victims. Times of death cannot be stated with 

any accuracy by the time our bodies are examined. 

When the sea goes down, there will come from the mainland boats and men. 



And they will find ten dead bodies and an unsolved problem on Indian Island. 
Signed 

Lawrence JusticeWargrave 

         Chapter 1

 The Letter

 It was in June of 1935 that I came home from my ranch in South America for a stay of about six months.
It had been a difficult time for us out there. Like everyone else, we had suffered from world depression. I
had various affairs to see to in England that I felt could only be successful if a personal touch was
introduced. My wife remained to manage the ranch.

 I need hardly say that one of my first actions on reaching England was to look up my old friend, Hercule
Poirot.

 I found him installed in one of the newest type of service flats in London. I accused him (and he admitted
the fact) of having chosen this particular building entirely on account of its strictly geometrical appearance
and proportions.

 ‘But yes, my friend, it is of a most pleasing symmetry, do you not find it so?’

 I said that I thought there could be too much squareness and, alluding to an old joke, I asked if in this



super-modern hostelry they managed to induce hens to lay square eggs.

 Poirot laughed heartily.

 ‘Ah, you remember that? Alas! no—science has not yet induced the hens to conform to modern tastes,
they still lay eggs of different sizes and colours!’

 I examined my old friend with an affectionate eye. He was looking wonderfully well—hardly a day older
than when I had last seen him.

 ‘You’re looking in fine fettle, Poirot,’ I said. ‘You’ve hardly aged at all. In fact, if it were possible, I
should say that you had fewer grey hairs than when I saw you last.’

 Poirot beamed on me.

 ‘And why is that not possible? It is quite true.’

 ‘Do you mean your hair is turning from grey to black instead of from black to grey?’

 ‘Precisely.’

 ‘But surely that’s a scientific impossibility!’

 ‘Not at all.’

 ‘But that’s very extraordinary. It seems against nature.’

 ‘As usual, Hastings, you have the beautiful and unsuspicious mind. Years do not change that in you! You
perceive a fact and mention the solution of it in the same breath without noticing that you are doing so!’

 I stared at him, puzzled.

 Without a word he walked into his bedroom and returned with a bottle in his hand which he handed to
me.

 I took it, for the moment uncomprehending.

 It bore the words:

 Revivit.—To bring back the natural tone of the hair.Revivit isnot a dye. In five shades, Ash, Chestnut,
Titian, Brown, Black.

 ‘Poirot,’ I cried. ‘You have dyed your hair!’

 ‘Ah, the comprehension comes to you!’

 ‘Sothat’s why your hair looks so much blacker than it did last time I was back.’

 ‘Exactly.’

 ‘Dear me,’ I said, recovering from the shock. ‘I suppose next time I come home I shall find you wearing



false moustaches—or are you doing so now?’

 Poirot winced. His moustaches had always been his sensitive point. He was inordinately proud of them.
My words touched him on the raw.

 ‘No, no, indeed,mon ami . That day, I pray the good God, is still far off. The false moustache!Quel
horreur! ’

 He tugged at them vigorously to assure me of their genuine character.

 ‘Well, they are very luxuriant still,’ I said.

 ‘N’est ce pas?Never, in the whole of London, have I seen a pair of moustaches to equal mine.’

 A good job too, I thought privately. But I would not for the world have hurt Poirot’s feelings by saying
so.

 Instead I asked if he still practised his profession on occasion.

 ‘I know,’ I said, ‘that you actually retired years ago—’

 ‘C’est vrai. To grow the vegetable marrows! And immediately a murder occurs—and I send the
vegetable marrows to promenade themselves to the devil. And since then—I know very well what you
will say—I am like the prima donna who makes positively the farewell performance! That farewell
performance, it repeats itself an indefinite number of times!’

 I laughed.

 ‘In truth, it has been very like that. Each time I say: this is the end. But no, something else arises! And I
will admit it, my friend, the retirement I care for it not at all. If the little grey cells are not exercised, they
grow the rust.’

 ‘I see,’ I said. ‘You exercise them in moderation.’

 ‘Precisely. I pick and choose. For Hercule Poirot nowadays only the cream of crime.’

 ‘Has there been much cream about?’

 ‘Pas mal. Not long ago I had a narrow escape.’

 ‘Of failure?’

 ‘No, no.’ Poirot looked shocked. ‘But I—I, Hercule Poirot, was nearly exterminated.’

 I whistled.

 ‘An enterprising murderer!’

 ‘Not so much enterprising as careless,’ said Poirot. ‘Precisely that—careless. But let us not talk of it.
You know, Hastings, in many ways I regard you as my mascot.’



 ‘Indeed?’ I said. ‘In what ways?’

 Poirot did not answer my question directly. He went on:

 ‘As soon as I heard you were coming over I said to myself: something will arise. As in former days we
will hunt together, we two. But if so it must be no common affair. It must be something’—he waved his
hands excitedly—‘somethingrecherché —delicate—fine…’ He gave the last untranslatable word its full
flavour.

 ‘Upon my word, Poirot,’ I said. ‘Anyone would think you were ordering a dinner at the Ritz.’

 ‘Whereas one cannot command a crime to order? Very true.’ He sighed. ‘But I believe in luck—in
destiny, if you will. It is your destiny to stand beside me and prevent me from committing the unforgivable
error.’

 ‘What do you call the unforgivable error?’

 ‘Overlooking the obvious.’

 I turned this over in my mind without quite seeing the point.

 ‘Well,’ I said presently, smiling, ‘has this super crime turned up yet?’

 ‘Pas encore. At least—that is—’

 He paused. A frown of perplexity creased his forehead. His hands automatically straightened an object
or two that I had inadvertently pushed awry.

 ‘I am not sure,’ he said slowly.

 There was something so odd about his tone that I looked at him in surprise.

 The frown still lingered.

 Suddenly with a brief decisive nod of the head he crossed the room to a desk near the window. Its
contents, I need hardly say, were all neatly docketed and pigeon-holed so that he was able at once to lay
his hand upon the paper he wanted.

 He came slowly across to me, an open letter in his hand. He read it through himself, then passed it to
me.

 ‘Tell me,mon ami ,’ he said. ‘What do you make of this?’

 I took it from him with some interest.

 It was written on thickish white notepaper in printed characters:

 Mr Hercule Poirot,—You fancy yourself, don’t you, at solving mysteries that are too difficult for our
poor thick-headed British police? Let us see, Mr Clever Poirot, just how clever you can be. Perhaps
you’ll find this nut too hard to crack. Look out for Andover, on the 21st of the month.



 Yours, etc.,

 A B C.

 I glanced at the envelope. That also was printed.

 ‘Postmarked WC1,’ said Poirot as I turned my attention to the postmark. ‘Well, what is your opinion?’

 I shrugged my shoulders as I handed it back to him.

 ‘Some madman or other, I suppose.’

 ‘That is all you have to say?’

 ‘Well—doesn’t it sound like a madman to you?’

 ‘Yes, my friend, it does.’

 His tone was grave. I looked at him curiously.

 ‘You take this very seriously, Poirot.’

 ‘A madman,mon ami , is to be taken seriously. A madman is a very dangerous thing.’

 ‘Yes, of course, that is true…I hadn’t considered that point…But what I meant was, it sounds more like
a rather idiotic kind of hoax. Perhaps some convivial idiot who had had one over the eight.’

 ‘Comment?Nine? Nine what?’

 ‘Nothing—just an expression. I meant a fellow who was tight. No, damn it, a fellow who had had a spot
too much to drink.’

 ‘Merci, Hastings—the expression “tight” Iam acquainted with it. As you say, there may be nothing more
to it than that…’

 ‘But you think there is?’ I asked, struck by the dissatisfaction of his tone.

 Poirot shook his head doubtfully, but he did not speak.

 ‘What have you done about it?’ I inquired.

 ‘What can one do? I showed it to Japp. He was of the same opinion as you—a stupid hoax—that was
the expression he used. They get these things every day at Scotland Yard. I, too, have had my share…’

 ‘But you take this one seriously?’

 Poirot replied slowly.

 ‘There is something about that letter, Hastings, that I do not like…’

 In spite of myself, his tone impressed me.



 ‘You think—what?’

 He shook his head, and picking up the letter, put it away again in the desk.

 ‘If you really take it seriously, can’t you do something?’ I asked.

 ‘As always, the man of action! But what is there to do? The county police have seen the letter but they,
too, do not take it seriously. There are no fingerprints on it. There are no local clues as to the possible
writer.’

 ‘In fact there is only your own instinct?’

 ‘Not instinct, Hastings. Instinct is a bad word. It is myknowledge —myexperience —that tells me that
something about that letter is wrong—’

 He gesticulated as words failed him, then shook his head again.

 ‘I may be making the mountain out of the anthill. In any case there is nothing to be done but wait.’

 ‘Well, the 21st is Friday. If a whacking great robbery takes place near Andover then—’

 ‘Ah, what a comfort that would be—!’

 ‘A comfort?’ I stared. The word seemed to be a very extraordinary one to use.

 ‘A robbery may be athrill but it can hardly be a comfort!’ I protested.

 Poirot shook his head energetically.

 ‘You are in error, my friend. You do not understand my meaning. A robbery would be a relief since it
would dispossess my mind of the fear of something else.’

 ‘Of what?’

 ‘Murder,’ said Hercule Poirot.

 Chapter 2

 Not from Captain Hastings’ Personal Narrative

A.B.Cust rose from his seat and peered near-sightedly round the shabby bedroom.
His back was stiff from sitting in a cramped position and as he stretched himself to his full height an
onlooker would have realized that he was, in reality, quite a tall man. His stoop and his near-sighted
peering gave a delusive impression.

 Going to a well-worn overcoat hanging on the back of the door, he took from the pocket a packet of
cheap cigarettes and some matches. He lit a cigarette and then returned to the table at which he had been
sitting. He picked up a railway guide and consulted it, then he returned to the consideration of a
typewritten list of names. With a pen, he made a tick against one of the first names on the list.



 It was Thursday, June 20th.

 Chapter 3

 Andover

 I had been impressed at the time by Poirot’s forebodings about the anonymous letter he had received,
but I must admit that the matter had passed from my mind when the 21st actually arrived and the first
reminder of it came with a visit paid to my friend by Chief Inspector Japp of Scotland Yard. The CID
inspector had been known to us for many years and he gave me a hearty welcome.

 ‘Well, I never,’ he exclaimed. ‘If it isn’t Captain Hastings back from the wilds of the what do you call it!
Quite like old days seeing you here with Monsieur Poirot. You’re looking well, too. Just a little bit thin on
top, eh? Well, that’s what we’re all coming to. I’m the same.’

 I winced slightly. I was under the impression that owing to the careful way I brushed my hair across the
top of my head the thinness referred to by Japp was quite unnoticeable. However, Japp had never been
remarkable for tact where I was concerned, so I put a good face upon it and agreed that we were none
of us getting any younger.

 ‘Except Monsieur Poirot here,’ said Japp. ‘Quite a good advertisement for a hair tonic, he’d be. Face
fungus sprouting finer than ever. Coming out into the limelight, too, in his old age. Mixed up in all the
celebrated cases of the day. Train mysteries, air mysteries, high society deaths—oh, he’s here, there and
everywhere. Never been so celebrated as since he retired.’

 ‘I have already told Hastings that I am like the prima donna who makes always one more appearance,’
said Poirot, smiling.

 ‘I shouldn’t wonder if you ended by detecting your own death,’ said Japp, laughing heartily. ‘That’s an
idea, that is. Ought to be put in a book.’

 ‘It will be Hastings who will have to do that,’ said Poirot, twinkling at me.

 ‘Ha ha! That would be a joke, that would,’ laughed Japp.

 I failed to see why the idea was so extremely amusing, and in any case I thought the joke was in poor
taste. Poirot, poor old chap, is getting on. Jokes about his approaching demise can hardly be agreeable
to him.

 Perhaps my manner showed my feelings, for Japp changed the subject.

 ‘Have you heard about Monsieur Poirot’s anonymous letter?’

 ‘I showed it to Hastings the other day,’ said my friend.

 ‘Of course,’ I exclaimed. ‘It had quite slipped my memory. Let me see, what was the date mentioned?’

 ‘The 21st,’ said Japp. ‘That’s what I dropped in about. Yesterday was the 21st and just out of curiosity
I rang up Andover last night. It was a hoax all right. Nothing doing. One broken shop window—kid
throwing stones—and a couple of drunk and disorderlies. So just for once our Belgian friend was
barking up the wrong tree.’



 ‘I am relieved, I must confess,’ acknowledged Poirot.

 ‘You’d quite got the wind up about it, hadn’t you?’ said Japp affectionately. ‘Bless you, we get dozens
of letters like that coming in every day! People with nothing better to do and a bit weak in the top storey
sit down and write ’em. They don’t mean any harm! Just a kind of excitement.’

 ‘I have indeed been foolish to take the matter so seriously,’ said Poirot. ‘It is the nest of the horse that I
put my nose into there.’

 ‘You’re mixing up mares and wasps,’ said Japp.

 ‘Pardon?’

 ‘Just a couple of proverbs. Well, I must be off. Got a little business in the next street to see
to—receiving stolen jewellery. I thought I’d just drop in on my way and put your mind at rest. Pity to let
those grey cells function unnecessarily.’

 With which words and a hearty laugh, Japp departed.

 ‘He does not change much, the good Japp, eh?’ asked Poirot.

 ‘He looks much older,’ I said. ‘Getting as grey as a badger,’ I added vindictively.

 Poirot coughed and said:

 ‘You know, Hastings, there is a little device—my hairdresser is a man of great ingenuity—one attaches it
to the scalp and brushes one’s own hair over it—it is not a wig, you comprehend—but—’

 ‘Poirot,’ I roared. ‘Once and for all I will have nothing to do with the beastly inventions of your
confounded hairdresser. What’s the matter with the top of my head?’

 ‘Nothing—nothing at all.’

 ‘It’s not as though I were goingbald .’

 ‘Of course not! Of course not!’

 ‘The hot summers out there naturally cause the hair to fall out a bit. I shall take back a really good hair
tonic.’

 ‘Précisément.’

 ‘And, anyway, what business is it of Japp’s? He always was an offensive kind of devil. And no sense of
humour. The kind of man who laughs when a chair is pulled away just as a man is about to sit down.’

 ‘A great many people would laugh at that.’

 ‘It’s utterly senseless.’

 ‘From the point of view of the man about to sit, certainly it is.’



 ‘Well,’ I said, slightly recovering my temper. (I admit that I am touchy about the thinness of my hair.)
‘I’m sorry that anonymous letter business came to nothing.’

 ‘I have indeed been in the wrong over that. About that letter, there was, I thought, the odour of the fish.
Instead a mere stupidity. Alas, I grow old and suspicious like the blind watch-dog who growls when
there is nothing there.’

 ‘If I’m going to co-operate with you, we must look about for some other “creamy” crime,’ I said with a
laugh.

 ‘You remember your remark of the other day? If you could order a crime as one orders a dinner, what
would you choose?’

 I fell in with his humour.

 ‘Let me see now. Let’s review the menu. Robbery? Forgery? No, I think not. Rather too vegetarian. It
must be murder—red-blooded murder—with trimmings, of course.’

 ‘Naturally. Thehors d’oeuvres .’

 ‘Who shall the victim be—man or woman? Man, I think. Some big-wig. American millionaire. Prime
Minister. Newspaper proprietor. Scene of the crime—well, what’s wrong with the good old library?
Nothing like it for atmosphere. As for the weapon—well, it might be a curiously twisted dagger—or
some blunt instrument—a carved stone idol—’

 Poirot sighed.

 ‘Or, of course,’ I said, ‘there’s poison—but that’s always so technical. Or a revolver shot echoing in the
night. Then there must be a beautiful girl or two—’

 ‘With auburn hair,’ murmured my friend.

 ‘Your same old joke. One of the beautiful girls, of course, must be unjustly suspected—and there’s
some misunderstanding between her and the young man. And then, of course, there must be some other
suspects—an older woman—dark, dangerous type—and some friend or rival of the dead man’s—and a
quiet secretary—dark horse—and a hearty man with a bluff manner—and a couple of discharged
servants or gamekeepers or somethings—and a damn fool of a detective rather like Japp—and
well—that’s about all.’

 ‘That is your idea of the cream, eh?’

 ‘I gather you don’t agree.’

 Poirot looked at me sadly.

 ‘You have made there a very pretty résuméof nearly all the detective stories that have ever been
written.’

 ‘Well,’ I said. ‘What wouldyou order?’



 Poirot closed his eyes and leaned back in his chair. His voice came purringly from between his lips.

 ‘A very simple crime. A crime with no complications. A crime of quiet domestic life…very
unimpassioned—veryintime .’

 ‘How can a crime beintime ?’

 ‘Supposing,’ murmured Poirot, ‘that four people sit down to play bridge and one, the odd man out, sits
in a chair by the fire. At the end of the evening the man by the fire is found dead. One of the four, while
he is dummy, has gone over and killed him, and intent on the play of the hand, the other three have not
noticed. Ah, there would be a crime for you!Which of the four was it? ’

 ‘Well,’ I said. ‘I can’t seeany excitement in that!’

 Poirot threw me a glance of reproof.

 ‘No, because there are no curiously twisted daggers, no blackmail, no emerald that is the stolen eye of a
god, no untraceable Eastern poisons. You have the melodramatic soul, Hastings. You would like, not one
murder, but a series of murders.’

 ‘I admit,’ I said, ‘that a second murder in a book often cheers things up. If the murder happens in the
first chapter, and you have to follow up everybody’s alibi until the last page but one—well, it does get a
bit tedious.’

 The telephone rang and Poirot rose to answer.

 ‘’Allo,’ he said. ‘’Allo. Yes, it is Hercule Poirot speaking.’

 He listened for a minute or two and then I saw his face change.

 His own side of the conversation was short and disjointed.

 ‘Mais oui…’

 ‘Yes, of course…’

 ‘But yes, we will come…’

 ‘Naturally…’

 ‘It may be as you say…’

 ‘Yes, I will bring it.A tout à l’heure then.’

 He replaced the receiver and came across the room to me.

 ‘That was Japp speaking, Hastings.’

 ‘Yes?’

 ‘He had just got back to the Yard. There was a message from Andover…’



 ‘Andover?’ I cried excitedly.

 Poirot said slowly:

 ‘An old woman of the name of Ascher who keeps a little tobacco and newspaper shop has been found
murdered.’

 I think I felt ever so slightly damped. My interest, quickened by the sound of Andover, suffered a faint
check. I had expected something fantastic—out of the way! The murder of an old woman who kept a
little tobacco shop seemed, somehow, sordid and uninteresting.

 Poirot continued in the same slow, grave voice:

 ‘The Andover police believe they can put their hand on the man who did it—’

 I felt a second throb of disappointment.

 ‘It seems the woman was on bad terms with her husband. He drinks and is by way of being rather a
nasty A.B.Customer. He’s threatened to take her life more than once.

 ‘Nevertheless,’ continued Poirot, ‘in view of what has happened, the police there would like to have
another look at the anonymous letter I received. I have said that you and I will go down to Andover at
once.’

 My spirits revived a little. After all, sordid as this crime seemed to be, it was acrime , and it was a long
time since I had had any association with crime and criminals.

 I hardly listened to the next words Poirot said. But they were to come back to me with significance later.

 ‘This is the beginning,’ said Hercule Poirot.

 Chapter 4

 Mrs Ascher

 We were received at Andover by Inspector Glen, a tall fair-haired man with a pleasant smile.

 For the sake of conciseness I think I had better give a brief résuméof the bare facts of the case.

 The crime was discovered by Police Constable Dover at 1 am on the morning of the 22nd. When on his
round he tried the door of the shop and found it unfastened, he entered and at first thought the place was
empty. Directing his torch over the counter, however, he caught sight of the huddled-up body of the old
woman. When the police surgeon arrived on the spot it was elicited that the woman had been struck
down by a heavy blow on the back of the head, probably while she was reaching down a packet of
cigarettes from the shelf behind the counter. Death must have occurred about nine to seven hours
previously.

 ‘But we’ve been able to get it down a bit nearer than that,’ explained the inspector. ‘We’ve found a man
who went in and bought some tobacco at 5.30. And a second man went in and found the shop empty, as
he thought, at five minutes past six. That puts the time at between 5.30 and 6.5. So far I haven’t been



able to find anyone who saw this man Ascher in the neighbourhood, but, of course, it’s early as yet. He
was in the Three Crowns at nine o’clock pretty far gone in drink. When we get hold of him he’ll be
detained on suspicion.’

 ‘Not a very desirable character, inspector?’ asked Poirot.

 ‘Unpleasant bit of goods.’

 ‘He didn’t live with his wife?’

 ‘No, they separated some years ago. Ascher’s a German. He was a waiter at one time, but he took to
drink and gradually became unemployable. His wife went into service for a bit. Her last place was as
cook-housekeeper to an old lady, Miss Rose. She allowed her husband so much out of her wages to
keep himself, but he was always getting drunk and coming round and making scenes at the places where
she was employed. That’s why she took the post with Miss Rose at The Grange. It’s three miles out of
Andover, dead in the country. He couldn’t get at her there so well. When Miss Rose died, she left Mrs
Ascher a small legacy, and the woman started this tobacco and newsagent business—quite a tiny
place—just cheap cigarettes and a few newspapers—that sort of thing. She just about managed to keep
going. Ascher used to come round and abuse her now and again and she used to give him a bit to get rid
of him. She allowed him fifteen shillings a week regular.’

 ‘Had they any children?’ asked Poirot.

 ‘No. There’s a niece. She’s in service near Overton. Very superior, steady young woman.’

 ‘And you say this man Ascher used to threaten his wife?’

 ‘That’s right. He was a terror when he was in drink—cursing and swearing that he’d bash her head in.
She had a hard time, did Mrs Ascher.’

 ‘What age of woman was she?’

 ‘Close on sixty—respectable and hard-working.’

 Poirot said gravely:

 ‘It is your opinion, inspector, that this man Ascher committed the crime?’

 The inspector coughed cautiously.

 ‘It’s a bit early to say that, Mr Poirot, but I’d like to hear Franz Ascher’s own account of how he spent
yesterday evening. If he can give a satisfactory account of himself, well and good—if not—’

 His pause was a pregnant one.

 ‘Nothing was missing from the shop?’

 ‘Nothing. Money in the till quite undisturbed. No signs of robbery.’

 ‘You think that this man Ascher came into the shop drunk, started abusing his wife and finally struck her
down?’



 ‘It seems the most likely solution. But I must confess, sir, I’d like to have another look at that very odd
letter you received. I was wondering if it was just possible that it came from this man Ascher.’

 Poirot handed over the letter and the inspector read it with a frown.

 ‘It doesn’t read like Ascher,’ he said at last. ‘I doubt if Ascher would use the term “our” British
police—not unless he was trying to be extra cunning—and I doubt if he’s got the wits for that. Then the
man’s a wreck—all to pieces. His hand’s too shaky to print letters clearly like this. It’s good quality
notepaper and ink, too. It’s odd that the letter should mention the 21st of the month. Of course itmight be
coincidence.’

 ‘That is possible—yes.’

 ‘But I don’t like this kind of coincidence, Mr Poirot. It’s a bit too pat.’

 He was silent for a minute or two—a frown creasing his forehead.

 ‘A B C. Who the devil could A B C be? We’ll see if Mary Drower (that’s the niece) can give us any
help. It’s an odd business. But for this letter I’d have put my money on Franz Ascher for a certainty.’

 ‘Do you know anything of Mrs Ascher’s past?’

 ‘She’s a Hampshire woman. Went into service as a girl up in London—that’s where she met Ascher and
married him. Things must have been difficult for them during the war. She actually left him for good in
1922. They were in London then. She came back here to get away from him, but he got wind of where
she was and followed her down here, pestering her for money—’ A constable came in. ‘Yes, Briggs,
what is it?’

 ‘It’s the man Ascher, sir. We’ve brought him in.’

 ‘Right. Bring him in here. Where was he?’

 ‘Hiding in a truck on the railway siding.’

 ‘He was, was he? Bring him along.’

 Franz Ascher was indeed a miserable and unprepossessing specimen. He was blubbering and cringing
and blustering alternately. His bleary eyes moved shiftily from one face to another.

 ‘What do you want with me? I have not done nothing. It is a shame and a scandal to bring me here! You
are swine, how dare you?’ His manner changed suddenly. ‘No, no, I do not mean that—you would not
hurt a poor old man—not be hard on him. Everyone is hard on poor old Franz. Poor old Franz.’

 Mr Ascher started to weep.

 ‘That’ll do, Ascher,’ said the inspector. ‘Pull yourself together. I’m not charging you with anything—yet.
And you’re not bound to make a statement unless you like. On the other hand, if you’renot concerned in
the murder of your wife—’

 Ascher interrupted him—his voice rising to a scream.



 ‘I did not kill her! I did not kill her! It is all lies! You are goddamned English pigs—all against me. I
never kill her—never.’

 ‘You threatened to often enough, Ascher.’

 ‘No, no. You do not understand. That was just a joke—a good joke between me and Alice. She
understood.’

 ‘Funny kind of joke! Do you care to say where you were yesterday evening, Ascher?’

 ‘Yes, yes—I tell you everything. I did not go near Alice. I am with friends—good friends. We are at the
Seven Stars—and then we are at the Red Dog—’

 He hurried on, his words stumbling over each other.

 ‘Dick Willows—he was with me—and old Curdie—and George—and Platt and lots of the boys. I tell
you I do not never go near Alice. Ach Gott, it is the truth I am telling you.’

 His voice rose to a scream. The inspector nodded to his underling.

 ‘Take him away. Detained on suspicion.’

 ‘I don’t know what to think,’ he said as the unpleasant, shaking old man with the malevolent, mouthing
jaw was removed. ‘If it wasn’t for the letter, I’d say he did it.’

 ‘What about the men he mentions?’

 ‘A bad crowd—not one of them would stick at perjury. I’ve no doubt hewas with them the greater part
of the evening. A lot depends on whether any one saw him near the shop between half-past five and six.’

 Poirot shook his head thoughtfully.

 ‘You are sure nothing was taken from the shop?’

 The inspector shrugged his shoulders.

 ‘That depends. A packet or two of cigarettes might have been taken—but you’d hardly commit murder
for that.’

 ‘And there was nothing—how shall I put it—introduced into the shop? Nothing that was odd
there—incongruous?’

 ‘There was a railway guide,’ said the inspector.

 ‘A railway guide?’

 ‘Yes. It was open and turned face downward on the counter. Looked as though someone had been
looking up the trains from Andover. Either the old woman or a A.B.Customer.’

 ‘Did she sell that type of thing?’



 The inspector shook his head.

 ‘She sold penny time-tables. This was a big one—kind of thing only Smith’s or a big stationer would
keep.’

 A light came into Poirot’s eyes. He leant forward.

 A light came into the inspector’s eye also.

 ‘A railway guide, you say. A Bradshaw—or an ABC?’

 ‘By the lord,’ he said. ‘Itwas an A B C.’

 Chapter 5

 Mary Drower

 I think that I can date my interest in the case from that first mention of the A B C railway guide. Up till
then I had not been able to raise much enthusiasm. This sordid murder of an old woman in a back-street
shop was so like the usual type of crime reported in the newspapers that it failed to strike a significant
note. In my own mind I had put down the anonymous letter with its mention of the 21st as a mere
coincidence. Mrs Ascher, I felt reasonably sure, had been the victim of her drunken brute of a husband.
But now the mention of the railway guide (so familiarly known by its abbreviation of A B C, listing as it
did all railway stations in their alphabetical order) sent a quiver of excitement through me. Surely—surely
this could not be a second coincidence?

 The sordid crime took on a new aspect.

 Who was the mysterious individual who had killed Mrs Ascher and left an A B C railway guide behind
him?

 When we left the police station our first visit was to the mortuary to see the body of the dead woman. A
strange feeling came over me as I gazed down on that wrinkled old face with the scanty grey hair drawn
back tightly from the temples. It looked so peaceful, so incredibly remote from violence.

 ‘Never knew who or what struck her,’ observed the sergeant. ‘That’s what Dr Kerr says. I’m glad it
was that way, poor old soul. A decent woman she was.’

 ‘She must have been beautiful once,’ said Poirot.

 ‘Really?’ I murmured incredulously.

 ‘But yes, look at the line of the jaw, the bones, the moulding of the head.’

 He sighed as he replaced the sheet and we left the mortuary.

 Our next move was a brief interview with the police surgeon.

 Dr Kerr was a competent-looking middle-aged man. He spoke briskly and with decision.



 ‘The weapon wasn’t found,’ he said. ‘Impossible to say what it may have been. A weighted stick, a
club, a form of sandbag—any of those would fit the case.’

 ‘Would much force be needed to strike such a blow?’

 The doctor shot a keen glance at Poirot.

 ‘Meaning, I suppose, could a shaky old man of seventy do it? Oh, yes, it’s perfectly possible—given
sufficient weight in the head of the weapon, quite a feeble person could achieve the desired result.’

 ‘Then the murderer could just as well be a woman as a man?’

 The suggestion took the doctor somewhat aback.

 ‘A woman, eh? Well, I confess it never occurred to me to connect a woman with this type of crime. But
of course it’s possible—perfectly possible. Only, psychologically speaking, I shouldn’t say this was a
woman’s crime.’

 Poirot nodded his head in eager agreement.

 ‘Perfectly, perfectly. On the face of it, highly improbable. But one must take all possibilities into account.
The body was lying—how?’

 The doctor gave us a careful description of the position of the victim. It was his opinion that she had
been standing with her back to the counter (and therefore to her assailant) when the blow had been
struck. She had slipped down in a heap behind the counter quite out of sight of anyone entering the shop
casually.

 When we had thanked Dr Kerr and taken our leave, Poirot said:

 ‘You perceive, Hastings, that we have already one further point in favour of Ascher’s innocence. If he
had been abusing his wife and threatening her, she would have beenfacing him over the counter. Instead
she had herback to her assailant—obviously she is reaching down tobacco or cigarettes for aA.B.Customer .’

 I gave a little shiver.

 ‘Pretty gruesome.’

 Poirot shook his head gravely.

 ‘Pauvre femme,’ he murmured.

 Then he glanced at his watch.

 ‘Overton is not, I think, many miles from here. Shall we run over there and have an interview with the
niece of the dead woman?’

 ‘Surely you will go first to the shop where the crime took place?’

 ‘I prefer to do that later. I have a reason.’



 He did not explain further, and a few minutes later we were driving on the London road in the direction
of Overton.

 The address which the inspector had given us was that of a good-sized house about a mile on the
London side of the village.

 Our ring at the bell was answered by a pretty dark-haired girl whose eyes were red with recent
weeping.

 Poirot said gently:

 ‘Ah! I think it is you who are Miss Mary Drower, the parlourmaid here?’

 ‘Yes, sir, that’s right. I’m Mary, sir.’

 ‘Then perhaps I can talk to you for a few minutes if your mistress will not object. It is about your aunt,
Mrs Ascher.’

 ‘The mistress is out, sir. She wouldn’t mind, I’m sure, if you came in here.’

 She opened the door of a small morning-room. We entered and Poirot, seating himself on a chair by the
window, looked up keenly into the girl’s face.

 ‘You have heard of your aunt’s death, of course?’

 The girl nodded, tears coming once more into her eyes.

 ‘This morning, sir. The police came over. Oh! it’s terrible! Poor auntie! Such a hard life as she’d had,
too. And now this—it’s too awful.’

 ‘The police did not suggest your returning to Andover?’

 ‘They said I must come to the inquest—that’s on Monday, sir. But I’ve nowhere to go there—I couldn’t
fancy being over the shop—now—and what with the housemaid being away, I didn’t want to put the
mistress out more than may be.’

 ‘You were fond of your aunt, Mary?’ said Poirot gently.

 ‘Indeed I was, sir. Very good she’s been to me always, auntie has. I went to her in London when I was
eleven years old, after mother died. I started in service when I was sixteen, but I usually went along to
auntie’s on my day out. A lot of trouble she went through with that German fellow. “My old devil,” she
used to call him. He’d never let her be in peace anywhere. Sponging, cadging old beast.’

 The girl spoke with vehemence.

 ‘Your aunt never thought of freeing herself by legal means from this persecution?’

 ‘Well, you see, he was her husband, sir, you couldn’t get away from that.’

 The girl spoke simply but with finality.



 ‘Tell me, Mary, he threatened her, did he not?’

 ‘Oh, yes, sir, it was awful the things he used to say. That he’d cut her throat, and such like. Cursing and
swearing too—both in German and in English. And yet auntie says he was a fine handsome figure of a
man when she married him. It’s dreadful to think, sir, what people come to.’

 ‘Yes, indeed. And so, I suppose, Mary, having actually heard these threats, you were not so very
surprised when you learnt what had happened?’

 ‘Oh, but I was, sir. You see, sir, I never thought for one moment that he meant it. I thought it was just
nasty talk and nothing more to it. And it isn’t as though auntie was afraid of him. Why, I’ve seen him slink
away like a dog with its tail between its legs when she turned on him.He was afraid ofher if you like.’

 ‘And yet she gave him money?’

 ‘Well, he was her husband, you see, sir.’

 ‘Yes, so you said before.’ He paused for a minute or two. Then he said: ‘Suppose that, after all, he did
not kill her.’

 ‘Didn’t kill her?’

 She stared.

 ‘That is what I said. Supposing someone else killed her…Have you any idea who that someone else
could be?’

 She stared at him with even more amazement.

 ‘I’ve no idea, sir. It doesn’t seem likely, though, does it?’

 ‘There was no one your aunt was afraid of?’

 Mary shook her head.

 ‘Auntie wasn’t afraid of people. She’d a sharp tongue and she’d stand up to anybody.’

 ‘You never heard her mention anyone who had a grudge against her?’

 ‘No, indeed, sir.’

 ‘Did she ever get anonymous letters?’

 ‘What kind of letters did you say, sir?’

 ‘Letters that weren’t signed—or only signed by something like A B C.’ He watched her narrowly, but
plainly she was at a loss. She shook her head wonderingly.

 ‘Has your aunt any relations except you?’

 ‘Not now, sir. One of ten she was, but only three lived to grow up. My Uncle Tom was killed in the



war, and my Uncle Harry went to South America and no one’s heard of him since, and mother’s dead,
of course, so there’s only me.’

 ‘Had your aunt any savings? Any money put by?’

 ‘She’d a little in the Savings Bank, sir—enough to bury her proper, that’s what she always said.
Otherwise she didn’t more than just make ends meet—what with her old devil and all.’

 Poirot nodded thoughtfully. He said—perhaps more to himself than to her:

 ‘At present one is in the dark—there is no direction—if things get clearer—’ He got up. ‘If I want you at
any time, Mary, I will write to you here.’

 ‘As a matter of fact, sir, I’m giving in my notice. I don’t like the country. I stayed here because I fancied
it was a comfort to auntie to have me near by. But now’—again the tears rose in her eyes—‘there’s no
reason I should stay, and so I’ll go back to London. It’s gayer for a girl there.’

 ‘I wish that, when you do go, you would give me your address. Here is my card.’

 He handed it to her. She looked at it with a puzzled frown.

 ‘Then you’re not—anything to do with the police, sir?’

 ‘I am a private detective.’

 She stood there looking at him for some moments in silence.

 She said at last:

 ‘Is there anything—queer going on, sir?’

 ‘Yes, my child. There is—something queer going on. Later you may be able to help me.’

 ‘I—I’ll do anything, sir. It—it wasn’tright , sir, auntie being killed.’

 A strange way of putting it—but deeply moving.

 A few seconds later we were driving back to Andover.

 Chapter 6

 The Scene of the Crime

 The street in which the tragedy had occurred was a turning off the main street. Mrs Ascher’s shop was
situated about halfway down it on the right-hand side.

 As we turned into the street Poirot glanced at his watch and I realized why he had delayed his visit to the
scene of the crime until now. It was just on half-past five. He had wished to reproduce yesterday’s
atmosphere as closely as possible.

 But if that had been his purpose it was defeated. Certainly at this moment the road bore very little



likeness to its appearance on the previous evening. There were a certain number of small shops
interspersed between private houses of the poorer class. I judged that ordinarily there would be a fair
number of people passing up and down—mostly people of the poorer classes, with a good sprinkling of
children playing on the pavements and in the road.

 At this moment there was a solid mass of people standing staring at one particular house or shop and it
took little perspicuity to guess which that was. What we saw was a mass of average human beings
looking with intense interest at the spot where another human being had been done to death.

 As we drew nearer this proved to be indeed the case. In front of a small dingy-looking shop with its
shutters now closed stood a harassed-looking young policeman who was stolidly adjuring the crowd to
‘pass along there.’ By the help of a colleague, displacements took place—a certain number of people
grudgingly sighed and betook themselves to their ordinary vocations, and almost immediately other
persons came along and took up their stand to gaze their fill on the spot where murder had been
committed.

 Poirot stopped a little distance from the main body of the crowd. From where we stood the legend
painted over the door could be read plainly enough. Poirot repeated it under his breath.

 ‘A. Ascher.Oui, c’est peut-être là —’

 He broke off.

 ‘Come, let us go inside, Hastings.’

 I was only too ready.

 We made our way through the crowd and accosted the young policeman. Poirot produced the
credentials which the inspector had given him. The constable nodded, and unlocked the door to let us
pass within. We did so and entered to the intense interest of the lookers-on.

 Inside it was very dark owing to the shutters being closed. The constable found and switched on the
electric light. The bulb was a low-powered one so that the interior was still dimly lit.

 I looked about me.

 A dingy little place. A few cheap magazines strewn about, and yesterday’s newspapers—all with a
day’s dust on them. Behind the counter a row of shelves reaching to the ceiling and packed with tobacco
and packets of cigarettes. There were also a couple of jars of peppermint humbugs and barley sugar. A
commonplace little shop, one of many thousand such others.

 The constable in his slow Hampshire voice was explaining themise en scène .

 ‘Down in a heap behind the counter, that’s where she was. Doctor says as how she never knew what hit
her. Must have been reaching up to one of the shelves.’

 ‘There was nothing in her hand?’

 ‘No, sir, but there was a packet of Player’s down beside her.’

 Poirot nodded. His eyes swept round the small space observing—noting.



 ‘And the railway guide was—where?’

 ‘Here, sir.’ The constable pointed out the spot on the counter. ‘It was open at the right page for
Andover and lying face down. Seems as though he must have been looking up the trains to London. If
so, it mightn’t have been an Andover man at all. But then, of course, the railway guide might have
belonged to someone else what had nothing to do with the murder at all, but just forgot it here.’

 ‘Fingerprints?’ I suggested.

 The man shook his head.

 ‘The whole place was examined straight away, sir. There weren’t none.’

 ‘Not on the counter itself?’ asked Poirot.

 ‘A long sight too many, sir! All confused and jumbled up.’

 ‘Any of Ascher’s among them?’

 ‘Too soon to say, sir.’

 Poirot nodded, then asked if the dead woman lived over the shop.

 ‘Yes, sir, you go through that door at the back, sir. You’ll excuse me not coming with you, but I’ve got
to stay—’

 Poirot passed through the door in question and I followed him. Behind the shop was a microscopic sort
of parlour and kitchen combined—it was neat and clean but very dreary looking and scantily furnished.
On the mantelpiece were a few photographs. I went up and looked at them and Poirot joined me.

 The photographs were three in all. One was a cheap portrait of the girl we had been with that afternoon,
Mary Drower. She was obviously wearing her best clothes and had the self-conscious, wooden smile on
her face that so often disfigures the expression in posed photography, and makes a snapshot preferable.

 The second was a more expensive type of picture—an artistically blurred reproduction of an elderly
woman with white hair. A high fur collar stood up round the neck.

 I guessed that this was probably the Miss Rose who had left Mrs Ascher the small legacy which had
enabled her to start in business.

 The third photograph was a very old one, now faded and yellow. It represented a young man and
woman in somewhat old-fashioned clothes standing arm in arm. The man had a button-hole and there
was an air of bygone festivity about the whole pose.

 ‘Probably a wedding picture,’ said Poirot. ‘Regard, Hastings, did I not tell you that she had been a
beautiful woman?’

 He was right. Disfigured by old-fashioned hairdressing and weird clothes, there was no disguising the
handsomeness of the girl in the picture with her clear-cut features and spirited bearing. I looked closely at
the second figure. It was almost impossible to recognise the seedy Ascher in this smart young man with



the military bearing.

 I recalled the leering drunken old man, and the toil-worn face of the dead woman—and I shivered a little
at the remorselessness of time…

 From the parlour a stair led to two upstairs rooms. One was empty and unfurnished, the other had
evidently been the dead woman’s bedroom. After being searched by the police it had been left as it was.
A couple of old worn blankets on the bed—a little stock of well-darned underwear in a
drawer—cookery recipes in another—a paper-backed novel entitledThe Green Oasis —a pair of new
stockings—pathetic in their cheap shininess—a couple of china ornaments—a Dresden shepherd much
broken, and a blue and yellow spotted dog—a black raincoat and a woolly jumper hanging on
pegs—such were the worldly possessions of the late Alice Ascher.

 If there had been any personal papers, the police had taken them.

 ‘Pauvre femme,’ murmured Poirot. ‘Come, Hastings, there is nothing for us here.’

 When we were once more in the street, he hesitated for a minute or two, then crossed the road. Almost
exactly opposite Mrs Ascher’s was a greengrocer’s shop—of the type that has most of its stock outside
rather than inside.

 In a low voice Poirot gave me certain instructions. Then he himself entered the shop. After waiting a
minute or two I followed him in. He was at the moment negotiating for a lettuce. I myself bought a pound
of strawberries.

 Poirot was talking animatedly to the stout lady who was serving him.

 ‘It was just opposite you, was it not, that this murder occurred? What an affair! What a sensation it must
have caused you!’

 The stout lady was obviously tired of talking about the murder. She must have had a long day of it. She
observed:

 ‘It would be as well if some of that gaping crowd cleared off. What is there to look at, I’d like to
know?’

 ‘It must have been very different last night,’ said Poirot. ‘Possibly you even observed the murderer enter
the shop—a tall, fair man with a beard, was he not? A Russian, so I have heard.’

 ‘What’s that?’ The woman looked up sharply. ‘A Russian did it, you say?’

 ‘I understand that the police have arrested him.’

 ‘Did you ever know?’ The woman was excited, voluble. ‘A foreigner.’

 ‘Mais oui. I thought perhaps you might have noticed him last night?’

 ‘Well, I don’t get much chance of noticing, and that’s a fact. The evening’s our busy time and there’s
always a fair few passing along and getting home after their work. A tall, fair man with a beard—no, I
can’t say I saw anyone of that description anywhere about.’



 I broke in on my cue.

 ‘Excuse me, sir,’ I said to Poirot. ‘I think you have been misinformed. A shortdark man I was told.’

 An interested discussion intervened in which the stout lady, her lank husband and a hoarse-voiced
shop-boy all participated. No less than four short dark men had been observed, and the hoarse boy had
seen a tall fair one, ‘but he hadn’t got no beard,’ he added regretfully.

 Finally, our purchases made, we left the establishment, leaving our falsehoods uncorrected.

 ‘And what was the point of all that, Poirot?’ I demanded somewhat reproachfully.

 ‘Parbleu, I wanted to estimate the chances of a stranger being noticed entering the shop opposite.’

 ‘Couldn’t you simply have asked—without all that tissue of lies?’

 ‘No,mon ami . If I had “simply asked”, as you put it, I should have got no answer at all to my questions.
You yourself are English and yet you do not seem to appreciate the quality of the English reaction to a
direct question. It is invariably one of suspicion and the natural result is reticence. If I had asked those
people for information they would have shut up like oysters. But by making a statement (and a somewhat
out of the way and preposterous one) and by your contradiction of it, tongues are immediately loosened.
We know also that that particular time was a “busy time”—that is, that everyone would be intent on their
own concerns and that there would be a fair number of people passing along the pavements. Our
murderer chose his time well, Hastings.’

 He paused and then added on a deep note of reproach:

 ‘Is it that you have not in any degree the common sense, Hastings? I say to you: “Make a purchase
quelconque” —and you deliberately choose the strawberries! Already they commence to creep through
their bag and endanger your good suit.’

 With some dismay, I perceived that this was indeed the case.

 I hastily presented the strawberries to a small boy who seemed highly astonished and faintly suspicious.

 Poirot added the lettuce, thus setting the seal on the child’s bewilderment.

 He continued to drive the moral home.

 ‘At a cheap greengrocer’s—notstrawberries. A strawberry, unless fresh picked, is bound to exude
juice. A banana—some apples—even a cabbage—butstrawberries —’

 ‘It was the first thing I thought of,’ I explained by way of excuse.

 ‘That is unworthy of your imagination,’ returned Poirot sternly.

 He paused on the sidewalk.

 The house and shop on the right of Mrs Ascher’s was empty. A ‘To Let’ sign appeared in the windows.
On the other side was a house with somewhat grimy muslin curtains.



 To this house Poirot betook himself and, there being no bell, executed a series of sharp flourishes with
the knocker.

 The door was opened after some delay by a very dirty child with a nose that needed attention.

 ‘Good evening,’ said Poirot. ‘Is your mother within?’

 ‘Ay?’ said the child.

 It stared at us with disfavour and deep suspicion.

 ‘Your mother,’ said Poirot.

 This took some twelve seconds to sink in, then the child turned and, bawling up the stairs ‘Mum, you’re
wanted,’ retreated to some fastness in the dim interior.

 A sharp-faced woman looked over the balusters and began to descend.

 ‘No good you wasting your time—’ she began, but Poirot interrupted her.

 He took off his hat and bowed magnificently.

 ‘Good evening, madame. I am on the staff of theEvening Flicker . I want to persuade you to accept a
fee of five pounds and let us have an article on your late neighbour, Mrs Ascher.’

 The irate words arrested on her lips, the woman came down the stairs smoothing her hair and hitching at
her skirt.

 ‘Come inside, please—on the left there. Won’t you sit down, sir.’

 The tiny room was heavily over-crowded with a massive pseudo-Jacobean suite, but we managed to
squeeze ourselves in and on to a hard-seated sofa.

 ‘You must excuse me,’ the woman was saying. ‘I am sure I’m sorry I spoke so sharp just now, but
you’d hardly believe the worry one has to put up with—fellows coming along selling this, that and the
other—vacuum cleaners, stockings, lavender bags and such-like foolery—and all so plausible and civil
spoken. Got your name, too, pat they have. It’s Mrs Fowler this, that and the other.’

 Seizing adroitly on the name, Poirot said:

 ‘Well, Mrs Fowler, I hope you’re going to do what I ask.’

 ‘I don’t know, I’m sure.’ The five pounds hung alluringly before Mrs Fowler’s eyes. ‘Iknew Mrs
Ascher, of course, but as towriting anything.’

 Hastily Poirot reassured her. No labour on her part was required. He would elicit the facts from her and
the interview would be written up.

 Thus encouraged, Mrs Fowler plunged willingly into reminiscence, conjecture and hearsay.

 Kept herself to herself, Mrs Ascher had. Not what you’d call reallyfriendly , but there, she’d had a lot of



trouble, poor soul, everyone knew that. And by rights Franz Ascher ought to have been locked up years
ago. Not that Mrs Ascher had been afraid of him—real tartar she could be when roused! Give as good
as she got any day. But there it was—the pitcher could go to the well once too often. Again and again,
she, Mrs Fowler, had said to her: ‘One of these days that man will do for you. Mark my words.’ And he
had done, hadn’t he? And there had she, Mrs Fowler, been right next door and never heard a sound.

 In a pause Poirot managed to insert a question.

 Had Mrs Ascher ever received any peculiar letters—letters without a proper signature—just something
like ABC?

 Regretfully, Mrs Fowler returned a negative answer.

 ‘I know the kind of thing you mean—anonymous letters they call them—mostly full of words you’d
blush to say out loud. Well, I don’t know, I’m sure, if Franz Ascher ever took to writing those. Mrs
Ascher never let on to me if he did. What’s that? A railway guide, an A B C? No, I never saw such a
thing about—and I’m sure if Mrs Ascher had been sent one I’d have heard about it. I declare you could
have knocked me down with a feather when I heard about this whole business. It was my girl Edie what
came to me. “Mum,” she says, “there’s ever so many policemen next door.” Gave me quite a turn, it did.
“Well,” I said, when I heard about it, “it does show that she ought never to have been alone in the
house—that niece of hers ought to have been with her. A man in drink can be like a ravening wolf,” I
said, “and in my opinion a wild beast is neither more nor less than what that old devil of a husband of hers
is. I’ve warned her,” I said, “many times and now my words have come true. He’ll do for you,” I said.
And he has done for her! You can’t rightly estimate what a man will do when he’s in drink and this
murder’s a proof of it.’

 She wound up with a deep gasp.

 ‘Nobody saw this man Ascher go into the shop, I believe?’ said Poirot.

 Mrs Fowler sniffed scornfully.

 ‘Naturally he wasn’t going to show himself,’ she said.

 How Mr Ascher had got there without showing himself she did not deign to explain.

 She agreed that there was no back way into the house and that Ascher was quite well known by sight in
the district.

 ‘But he didn’t want to swing for it and he kept himself well hid.’

 Poirot kept the conversational ball rolling some little time longer, but when it seemed certain that Mrs
Fowler had told all that she knew not once but many times over, he terminated the interview, first paying
out the promised sum.

 ‘Rather a dear five pounds’ worth, Poirot,’ I ventured to remark when we were once more in the street.

 ‘So far, yes.’

 ‘You think she knows more than she has told?’



 ‘My friend, we are in the peculiar position ofnot knowing what questions to ask . We are like little
children playingcache-cache in the dark. We stretch out our hands and grope about. Mrs Fowler has told
us all that shethinks she knows—and has thrown in several conjectures for good measure! In the future,
however, her evidence may be useful. It is for the future that I have invested that sum of five pounds.’

 I did not quite understand the point, but at this moment we ran into Inspector Glen.

 Chapter 7

 Mr Partridge and Mr Riddell

 Inspector Glen was looking rather gloomy. He had, I gathered, spent the afternoon trying to get a
complete list of persons who had been noticed entering the tobacco shop.

 ‘And nobody has seen anyone?’ Poirot inquired.

 ‘Oh, yes, they have. Three tall men with furtive expressions—four short men with black
moustaches—two beards—three fat men—all strangers—and all, if I’m to believe witnesses, with sinister
expressions! I wonder somebody didn’t see a gang of masked men with revolvers while they were about
it!’

 Poirot smiled sympathetically.

 ‘Does anybody claim to have seen the man Ascher?’

 ‘No, they don’t. And that’s another point in his favour. I’ve just told the Chief Constable that I think this
is a job for Scotland Yard. I don’t believe it’s a local crime.’

 Poirot said gravely:

 ‘I agree with you.’

 The inspector said:

 ‘You know, Monsieur Poirot, it’s a nasty business—a nasty business…I don’t like it…’

 We had two more interviews before returning to London.

 The first was with Mr James Partridge. Mr Partridge was the last person known to have seen Mrs
Ascher alive. He had made a purchase from her at 5.30.

 Mr Partridge was a small man, a bank clerk by profession. He wore pince-nez, was very dry and
spare-looking and extremely precise in all his utterances. He lived in a small house as neat and trim as
himself.

 ‘Mr—er—Poirot,’ he said, glancing at the card my friend had handed to him. ‘From Inspector Glen?
What can I do for you, Mr Poirot?’

 ‘I understand, Mr Partridge, that you were the last person to see Mrs Ascher alive.’

 Mr Partridge placed his finger-tips together and looked at Poirot as though he were a doubtful cheque.



 ‘That is a very debatable point, Mr Poirot,’ he said. ‘Many people may have made purchases from Mrs
Ascher after I did so.’

 ‘If so, they have not come forward to say so.’

 Mr Partridge coughed.

 ‘Some people, Mr Poirot, have no sense of public duty.’

 He looked at us owlishly through his spectacles.

 ‘Exceedingly true,’ murmured Poirot. ‘You, I understand, went to the police of your own accord?’

 ‘Certainly I did. As soon as I heard of the shocking occurrence I perceived that my statement might be
helpful and came forward accordingly.’

 ‘A very proper spirit,’ said Poirot solemnly. ‘Perhaps you will be so kind as to repeat your story to me.’

 ‘By all means. I was returning to this house and at 5.30 precisely—’

 ‘Pardon, how was it that you knew the time so accurately?’

 Mr Partridge looked a little annoyed at being interrupted.

 ‘The church clock chimed. I looked at my watch and found I was a minute slow. That was just before I
entered Mrs Ascher’s shop.’

 ‘Were you in the habit of making purchases there?’

 ‘Fairly frequently. It was on my way home. About once or twice a week I was in the habit of purchasing
two ounces of John Cotton mild.’

 ‘Did you know Mrs Ascher at all? Anything of her circumstances or her history?’

 ‘Nothing whatever. Beyond my purchase and an occasional remark as to the state of the weather, I had
never spoken to her.’

 ‘Did you know she had a drunken husband who was in the habit of threatening her life?’

 ‘No, I knew nothing whatever about her.’

 ‘You knew her by sight, however. Did anything about her appearance strike you as unusual yesterday
evening? Did she appear flurried or put out in any way?’

 Mr Partridge considered.

 ‘As far as I noticed, she seemed exactly as usual,’ he said.

 Poirot rose.



 ‘Thank you, Mr Partridge, for answering these questions. Have you, by any chance, an A B C in the
house? I want to look up my return train to London.’

 ‘On the shelf just behind you,’ said Mr Partridge.

 On the shelf in question were an A B C, a Bradshaw, the Stock Exchange Year Book, Kelly’s
Directory, a Who’s Who and a local directory.

 Poirot took down the A B C, pretended to look up a train, then thanked Mr Partridge and took his
leave.

 Our next interview was with Mr Albert Riddell and was of a highly different character. Mr Albert Riddell
was a platelayer and our conversation took place to the accompaniment of the clattering of plates and
dishes by Mr Riddell’s obviously nervous wife, the growling of Mr Riddell’s dog and the undisguised
hostility of Mr Riddell himself.

 He was a big clumsy giant of a man with a broad face and small suspicious eyes. He was in the act of
eating meat-pie, washed down by exceedingly black tea. He peered at us angrily over the rim of his cup.

 ‘Told all I’ve got to tell once, haven’t I?’ he growled. ‘What’s it to do with me, anyway? Told it to the
blarsted police, I ’ave, and now I’ve got to spit it all out again to a couple of blarsted foreigners.’

 Poirot gave a quick, amused glance in my direction and then said:

 ‘In truth I sympathize with you, but what will you? It is a question of murder, is it not? One has to be
very, very careful.’

 ‘Best tell the gentleman what he wants, Bert,’ said the woman nervously.

 ‘You shut your blarsted mouth,’ roared the giant.

 ‘You did not, I think, go to the police of your own accord.’ Poirot slipped the remark in neatly.

 ‘Why the hell should I? It were no business of mine.’

 ‘A matter of opinion,’ said Poirot indifferently. ‘There has been a murder—the police want to know who
has been in the shop—I myself think it would have—what shall I say?—looked more natural if you had
come forward.’

 ‘I’ve got my work to do. Don’t say I shouldn’t have come forward in my own time—’

 ‘But as it was, the police were given your name as that of a person seen to go into Mrs Ascher’s and
they had to come to you. Were they satisfied with your account?’

 ‘Why shouldn’t they be?’ demanded Bert truculently.

 Poirot merely shrugged his shoulders.

 ‘What are you getting at, mister? Nobody’s got anything against me? Everyone knows who did the old
girl in, that b—of a husband of hers.’



 ‘But he was not in the street that evening and you were.’

 ‘Trying to fasten it on me, are you? Well, you won’t succeed. What reason had I got to do a thing like
that? Think I wanted to pinch a tin of her bloody tobacco? Think I’m a bloody homicidal maniac as they
call it? Think I—?’

 He rose threateningly from his seat. His wife bleated out:

 ‘Bert, Bert—don’t say such things. Bert—they’ll think—’

 ‘Calm yourself, monsieur,’ said Poirot. ‘I demand only your account of your visit. That you refuse it
seems to me—what shall we say—a little odd?’

 ‘Who said I refused anything?’ Mr Riddell sank back again into his seat. ‘I don’t mind.’

 ‘It was six o’clock when you entered the shop?’

 ‘That’s right—a minute or two after, as a matter of fact. Wanted a packet of Gold Flake. I pushed open
the door—’

 ‘It was closed, then?’

 ‘That’s right. I thought shop was shut, maybe. But it wasn’t. I went in, there wasn’t anyone about. I
hammered on the counter and waited a bit. Nobody came, so I went out again. That’s all, and you can
put it in your pipe and smoke it.’

 ‘You didn’t see the body fallen down behind the counter?’

 ‘No, no more would you have done—unless you was looking for it, maybe.’

 ‘Was there a railway guide lying about?’

 ‘Yes, there was—face downwards. It crossed my mind like that the old woman might have had to go off
sudden by train and forgot to lock shop up.’

 ‘Perhaps you picked up the railway guide or moved it along the counter?’

 ‘Didn’t touch the b—thing. I did just what I said.’

 ‘And you did not see anyone leaving the shop before you yourself got there?’

 ‘Didn’t see any such thing. What I say is, why pitch on me—?’

 Poirot rose.

 ‘Nobody is pitching upon you—yet. Bonsoir, monsieur.’

 He left the man with his mouth open and I followed him.

 In the street he consulted his watch.



 ‘With great haste, my friend, we might manage to catch the 7.2. Let us despatch ourselves quickly.’

 Chapter 8

 The Second Letter

 ‘Well?’ I demanded eagerly.

 We were seated in a first-class carriage which we had to ourselves. The train, an express, had just
drawn out of Andover.

 ‘The crime,’ said Poirot, ‘was committed by a man of medium height with red hair and a cast in the left
eye. He limps slightly on the right foot and has a mole just below the shoulder-blade.’

 ‘Poirot?’ I cried.

 For the moment I was completely taken in. Then the twinkle in my friend’s eye undeceived me.

 ‘Poirot!’ I said again, this time in reproach.

 ‘Mon ami, what will you? You fix upon me a look of doglike devotion and demand of me a
pronouncement àla Sherlock Holmes! Now for the truth—I do not know what the murderer looks like,
nor where he lives, nor how to set hands upon him.’

 ‘If only he had left some clue,’ I murmured.

 ‘Yes, the clue—it is always the clue that attracts you. Alas that he did not smoke the cigarette and leave
the ash, and then step in it with a shoe that has nails of a curious pattern. No—he is not so obliging. But
at least, my friend, you have therailway guide . The A B C, that is a clue for you!’

 ‘Do you think he left it by mistake then?’

 ‘Of course not. He left it on purpose. The fingerprints tell us that.’

 ‘But there weren’t any on it.’

 ‘That is what I mean. What was yesterday evening? A warm June night. Does a man stroll about on such
an evening ingloves ? Such a man would certainly have attracted attention. Therefore since there are no
fingerprints on the A B C, it must have been carefully wiped. An innocent man would have left prints—a
guilty man would not. So our murderer left it there for a purpose—but for all that it is none the less a clue.
That A B C was bought by someone—it was carried by someone—there is a possibility there.’

 ‘You think we may learn something that way?’

 ‘Frankly, Hastings, I am not particularly hopeful. This man, this unknown X, obviously prides himself on
his abilities. He is not likely to blaze a trail that can be followed straight away.’

 ‘So that really the ABC isn’t helpful at all.’

 ‘Not in the sense you mean.’



 ‘In any sense?’

 Poirot did not answer at once. Then he said slowly:

 ‘The answer to that is yes. We are confronted here by an unknown personage. He is in the dark and
seeks to remain in the dark. But in the very nature of thingshe cannot help throwing light upon himself . In
one sense we know nothing about him—in another sense we know already a good deal. I see his figure
dimly taking shape—a man who prints clearly and well—who buys good-quality paper—who is at great
needs to express his personality. I see him as a child possibly ignored and passed over—I see him
growing up with an inward sense of inferiority—warring with a sense of injustice…I see that inner
urge—to assert himself—to focus attention on himself ever becoming stronger, and events,
circumstances—crushing it down—heaping, perhaps, more humiliations on him. And inwardly the match
is set to the powder train…’

 ‘That’s all pure conjecture,’ I objected. ‘It doesn’t give you any practical help.’

 ‘You prefer the match end, the cigarette ash, the nailed boots! You always have. But at least we can ask
ourselves some practical questions. Why the A B C? Why Mrs Ascher? Why Andover?’

 ‘The woman’s past life seems simple enough,’ I mused. ‘The interviews with those two men were
disappointing. They couldn’t tell us anything more than we knew already.’

 ‘To tell the truth, I did not expect much in that line. But we could not neglect two possible candidates for
the murder.’

 ‘Surely you don’t think—’

 ‘There is at least a possibility that the murderer lives in or near Andover. That is a possible answer to our
question: “Why Andover?” Well, here were two men known to have been in the shop at the requisite
time of day. Either of themmight be the murderer. And there is nothing as yet to show that one or other of
them isnot the murderer.’

 ‘That great hulking brute, Riddell, perhaps,’ I admitted.

 ‘Oh, I am inclined to acquit Riddell off-hand. He was nervous, blustering, obviously uneasy—’

 ‘But surely that just shows—’

 ‘A nature dI ametrically opposed to that which penned the A B C letter. Conceit and self-confidence are
the characteristics that we must look for.’

 ‘Someone who throws his weight about?’

 ‘Possibly. But some people, under a nervous and self-effacing manner, conceal a great deal of vanity
and self-satisfaction.’

 ‘You don’t think that little Mr Partridge—’

 ‘He is morele type . One cannot say more than that. He acts as the writer of the letter would act—goes
at once to the police—pushes himself to the fore—enjoys his position.’



 ‘Do you really think—?’

 ‘No, Hastings. Personally I believe that the murderer came from outside Andover, but we must neglect
no avenue of research. And although I say “he” all the time, we must not exclude the possibility of a
woman being concerned.’

 ‘Surely not!’

 ‘The method of attack is that of a man, I agree. But anonymous letters are written by women rather than
by men. We must bear that in mind.’

 I was silent for a few minutes, then I said:

 ‘What do we do next?’

 ‘My energetic Hastings,’ Poirot said and smiled at me.

 ‘No, but what do we do?’

 ‘Nothing.’

 ‘Nothing?’ My disappointment rang out clearly.

 ‘Am I the magician? The sorcerer? What would you have me do?’

 Turning the matter over in my mind I found it difficult to give an answer. Nevertheless I felt convinced
that something ought to be done and that we should not allow the grass to grow under our feet.

 I said:

 ‘There is the A B C—and the notepaper and envelope—’

 ‘Naturally everything is being done in that line. The police have all the means at their disposal for that
kind of inquiry. If anything is to be discovered on those lines have no fear but that they will discover it.’

 With that I was forced to rest content.

 In the days that followed I found Poirot curiously disinclined to discuss the case. When I tried to reopen
the subject he waved it aside with an impatient hand.

 In my own mind I was afraid that I fathomed his motive. Over the murder of Mrs Ascher, Poirot had
sustained a defeat. A B C had challenged him—and A B C had won. My friend, acA.B.Customed to an
unbroken line of successes, was sensitive to his failure—so much so that he could not even endure
discussion of the subject. It was, perhaps, a sign of pettiness in so great a man, but even the most sober
of us is liable to have his head turned by success. In Poirot’s case the head-turning process had been
going on for years. Small wonder if its effects became noticeable at long last.

 Understanding, I respected my friend’s weakness and I made no further reference to the case. I read in
the paper the account of the inquest. It was very brief, no mention was made of the A B C letter, and a
verdict was returned of murder by some person or persons unknown. The crime attracted very little
attention in the press. It had no popular or spectacular features. The murder of an old woman in a side



street was soon passed over in the press for more thrilling topics.

 Truth to tell, the affair was fading from my mind also, partly, I think, because I disliked to think of Poirot
as being in any way associated with a failure, when on July 25th it was suddenly revived.

 I had not seen Poirot for a couple of days as I had been away in Yorkshire for the weekend. I arrived
back on Monday afternoon and the letter came by the six o’clock post. I remember the sudden, sharp
intake of breath that Poirot gave as he slit open that particular envelope.

 ‘It has come,’ he said.

 I stared at him—not understanding.

 ‘What has come?’

 ‘The second chapter of the A B C business.’

 For a minute I looked at him uncomprehendingly. The matter had really passed from my memory.

 ‘Read,’ said Poirot and passed me over the letter.

 As before, it was printed on good-quality paper.

 Dear Mr Poirot,—Well, what about it? First game to me, I think. The Andover business went with a
swing, didn’t it?

 But the fun’s only just beginning. Let me draw your attention to Bexhill-on-Sea. Date, the 25th inst.

 What a merry time we are having! Yours etc.

 A B C

 ‘Good God, Poirot,’ I cried. ‘Does this mean that this fiend is going to attempt another crime?’

 ‘Naturally, Hastings. What else did you expect? Did you think that the Andover business was an isolated
case? Do you not remember my saying: “This is the beginning”?’

 ‘But this is horrible!’

 ‘Yes, it is horrible.’

 ‘We’re up against a homicidal maniac.’

 ‘Yes.’

 His quietness was more impressive than any heroics could have been. I handed back the letter with a
shudder.

 The following morning saw us at a conference of powers. The Chief Constable of Sussex, the Assistant
Commissioner of the CID, Inspector Glen from Andover, Superintendent Carter of the Sussex police,
Japp and a younger inspector called Crome, and Dr Thompson, the famous alienist, were all assembled



together. The postmark on this letter was Hampstead, but in Poirot’s opinion little importance could be
attached to this fact.

 The matter was discussed fully. Dr Thompson was a pleasant middle-aged man who, in spite of his
learning, contented himself with homely language, avoiding the technicalities of his profession.

 ‘There’s no doubt,’ said the Assistant Commissioner, ‘that the two letters are in the same hand. Both
were written by the same person.’

 ‘And we can fairly assume that that person was responsible for the Andover murder.’

 ‘Quite. We’ve now got definite warning of a second crime scheduled to take place on the 25th—the day
after tomorrow—at Bexhill. What steps can be taken?’

 The Sussex Chief Constable looked at his superintendent.

 ‘Well, Carter, what about it?’

 The superintendent shook his head gravely.

 ‘It’s difficult, sir. There’s not the least clue towards whom the victim may be. Speaking fair and square,
what stepscan we take?’

 ‘A suggestion,’ murmured Poirot.

 Their faces turned to him.

 ‘I think it possible that the surname of the intended victim will begin with the letter B.’

 ‘That would be something,’ said the superintendent doubtfully.

 ‘An alphabetical complex,’ said Dr Thompson thoughtfully.

 ‘I suggest it as a possibility—no more. It came into my mind when I saw the name Ascher clearly written
over the shop door of the unfortunate woman who was murdered last month. When I got the letter
naming Bexhill it occurred to me as a possibility that the victim as well as the place might be selected by
an alphabetical system.’

 ‘It’s possible,’ said the doctor. ‘On the other hand, it may be that the name Ascher was a
coincidence—that the victim this time, no matter what her name is, will again be an old woman who
keeps a shop. We’re dealing, remember, with a madman. So far he hasn’t given us any clue as to
motive.’

 ‘Has a madman any motive, sir?’ asked the superintendent sceptically.

 ‘Of course he has, man. A deadly logic is one of the special characteristics of acute mania. A man may
believe himself divinely appointed to kill clergymen—or doctors—or old women in tobacco shops—and
there’s always some perfectly coherent reason behind it. We mustn’t let the alphabetical business run
away with us. Bexhill succeeding to Andovermay be a mere coincidence.’

 ‘We can at least take certain precautions, Carter, and make a special note of the B’s, especially small



shopkeepers, and keep a watch on all small tobacconists and newsagents looked after by a single
person. I don’t think there’s anything more we can do than that. Naturally, keep tabs on all strangers as
far as possible.’

 The superintendent uttered a groan.

 ‘With the schools breaking up and the holidays beginning? People are fairly flooding into the place this
week.’

 ‘We must do what we can,’ the Chief Constable said sharply.

 Inspector Glen spoke in his turn.

 ‘I’ll have a watch kept on anyone connected with the Ascher business. Those two witnesses, Partridge
and Riddell, and of course Ascher himself. If they show any sign of leaving Andover they’ll be followed.’

 The conference broke up after a few more suggestions and a little desultory conversation.

 ‘Poirot,’ I said as we walked along by the river. ‘Surely this crime can be prevented?’

 He turned a haggard face to me.

 ‘The sanity of a city full of men against the insanity of one man? I fear, Hastings—I very much fear.
Remember the long-continued successes of Jack the Ripper.’

 ‘It’s horrible,’ I said.

 ‘Madness, Hastings, is a terrible thing…I am afraid…I am very much afraid…’

 Chapter 9

 The Bexhill-on-Sea Murder

 I still remember my awakening on the morning of the 25th of July. It must have been about seven-thirty.

 Poirot was standing by my bedside gently shaking me by the shoulder. One glance at his face brought
me from semi-consciousness into the full possession of my faculties.

 ‘What is it?’ I demanded, sitting up rapidly.

 His answer came quite simply, but a wealth of emotion lay behind the three words he uttered.

 ‘It has happened.’

 ‘What?’ I cried. ‘You mean—buttoday is the 25th.’

 ‘It took place last night—or rather in the early hours of this morning.’

 As I sprang from bed and made a rapid toilet, he recounted briefly what he had just learnt over the
telephone.



 ‘The body of a young girl has been found on the beach at Bexhill. She has been identified as Elizabeth
Barnard, a waitress in one of the cafés, who lived with her parents in a little recently built bungalow.
Medical evidence gave the time of death as between 11.30 and 1 am.’

 ‘They’re quite sure that this isthe crime?’ I asked, as I hastily lathered my face.

 ‘An ABC open at the trains to Bexhill was found actually under the body.’

 I shivered.

 ‘This is horrible!’

 ‘Faites attention, Hastings. I do not want a second tragedy in my rooms!’

 I wiped the blood from my chin rather ruefully.

 ‘What is our plan of campaign?’ I asked.

 ‘The car will call for us in a few moments’ time. I will bring you a cup of coffee here so that there will be
no delay in starting.’

 Twenty minutes later we were in a fast police car crossing the Thames on our way out of London.

 With us was Inspector Crome, who had been present at the conference the other day, and who was
officially in charge of the case.

 Crome was a very different type of officer from Japp. A much younger man, he was the silent, superior
type. Well educated and well read, he was, for my taste, several shades too pleased with himself. He had
lately gained kudos over a series of child murders, having patiently tracked down the criminal who was
now in Broadmoor.

 He was obviously a suitable person to undertake the present case, but I thought that he was just a little
too aware of the fact himself. His manner to Poirot was a shade patronising. He deferred to him as a
younger man to an older one—in a rather self-conscious, ‘public school’ way.

 ‘I’ve had a good long talk with Dr Thompson,’ he said. ‘He’s very interested in the “chain” or “series”
type of murder. It’s the product of a particular distorted type of mentality. As a layman one can’t, of
course, appreciate the finer points as they present themselves to a medical point of view.’ He coughed.
‘As a matter of fact—my last case—I don’t know whether you read about it—the Mabel Homer case,
the Muswell Hill schoolgirl, you know—that man Capper was extraordinary. Amazingly difficult to pin
the crime on to him—it was his third, too! Looked as sane as you or I. But there are various
tests—verbal traps, you know—quite modern, of course, there was nothing of that kind in your day.
Once you can induce a man to give himself away, you’ve got him! He knows that you know and his
nerve goes. He starts giving himself away right and left.’

 ‘Even in my day that happened sometimes,’ said Poirot.

 Inspector Crome looked at him and murmured conversationally:

 ‘Oh, yes?’



 There was silence between us for some time. As we passed New Cross Station, Crome said:

 ‘If there’s anything you want to ask me about the case, pray do so.’

 ‘You have not, I presume, a description of the dead girl?’

 ‘She was twenty-three years of age, engaged as a waitress at the Ginger Cat café—’

 ‘Pas c¸a. I wondered—if she were pretty?’

 ‘As to that I’ve no information,’ said Inspector Crome with a hint of withdrawal. His manner said:
‘Really—these foreigners! All the same!’

 A faint look of amusement came into Poirot’s eyes.

 ‘It does not seem to you important, that? Yet,pour une femme , it is of the first importance. Often it
decides her destiny!’

 Another silence fell.

 It was not until we were nearing Sevenoaks that Poirot opened the conversation again.

 ‘Were you informed, by any chance, how and with what the girl was strangled?’

 Inspector Crome replied briefly.

 ‘Strangled with her own belt—a thick, knitted affair, I gather.’

 Poirot’s eyes opened very wide.

 ‘Aha,’ he said. ‘At last we have a piece of information that is very definite. That tells one something,
does it not?’

 ‘I haven’t seen it yet,’ said Inspector Crome coldly.

 I felt impatient with the man’s caution and lack of imagination.

 ‘It gives us the hallmark of the murderer,’ I said. ‘The girl’s own belt. It shows the particular beastliness
of his mind!’

 Poirot shot me a glance I could not fathom. On the face of it it conveyed humorous impatience. I thought
that perhaps it was a warning not to be too outspoken in front of the inspector.

 I relapsed into silence.

 At Bexhill we were greeted by Superintendent Carter. He had with him a pleasant-faced,
intelligent-looking young inspector called Kelsey. The latter was detailed to work in with Crome over the
case.

 ‘You’ll want to make your own inquiries, Crome,’ said the superintendent. ‘So I’ll just give you the main
heads of the matter and then you can get busy right away.’



 ‘Thank you, sir,’ said Crome.

 ‘We’ve broken the news to her father and mother,’ said the superintendent. ‘Terrible shock to them, of
course. I left them to recover a bit before questioning them, so you can start from the beginning there.’

 ‘There are other members of the family—yes?’ asked Poirot.

 ‘There’s a sister—a typist in London. She’s been communicated with. And there’s a young man—in
fact, the girl was supposed to be out with him last night, I gather.’

 ‘Any help from the A B C guide?’ asked Crome.

 ‘It’s there,’ the superintendent nodded towards the table. ‘No fingerprints. Open at the page for Bexhill.
A new copy, I should say—doesn’t seem to have been opened much. Not bought anywhere round here.
I’ve tried all the likely stationers.’

 ‘Who discovered the body, sir?’

 ‘One of these fresh-air, early-morning colonels. Colonel Jerome. He was out with his dog about 6 am.
Went along the front in the direction of Cooden, and down on to the beach. Dog went off and sniffed at
something. Colonel called it. Dog didn’t come. Colonel had a look and thought something queer was up.
Went over and looked. Behaved very properly. Didn’t touch her at all and rang us up immediately.’

 ‘And the time of death was round about midnight last night?’

 ‘Between midnight and 1 am—that’s pretty certain. Our homicidal joker is a man of his word. If he says
the 25th, it is the 25th—though it may have been only by a few minutes.’

 Crome nodded.

 ‘Yes, that’s his mentality all right. There’s nothing else? Nobody saw anything helpful?’

 ‘Not as far as we know. But it’s early yet. Everyone who saw a girl in white walking with a man last
night will be along to tell us about it soon, and as I imagine there were about four or five hundred girls in
white walking with young men last night, it ought to be a nice business.’

 ‘Well, sir, I’d better get down to it,’ said Crome. ‘There’s the café and there’s the girl’s home. I’d
better go to both of them. Kelsey can come with me.’

 ‘And Mr Poirot?’ asked the superintendent.

 ‘I will accompany you,’ said Poirot to Crome with a little bow.

 Crome, I thought, looked slightly annoyed. Kelsey, who had not seen Poirot before, grinned broadly.

 It was an unfortunate circumstance that the first time people saw my friend they were always disposed to
consider him as a joke of the first water.

 ‘What about this belt she was strangled with?’ asked Crome. ‘Mr Poirot is inclined to think it’s a
valuable clue. I expect he’d like to see it.’



 ‘Du tout,’ said Poirot quickly. ‘You misunderstood me.’

 ‘You’ll get nothing from that,’ said Carter. ‘It wasn’t a leather belt—might have got fingerprints if it had
been. Just a thick sort of knitted silk—ideal for the purpose.’

 I gave a shiver.

 ‘Well,’ said Crome, ‘we’d better be getting along.’

 We set out forthwith.

 Our first visit was to the Ginger Cat. Situated on the sea front, this was the usual type of small tearoom.
It had little tables covered with orange-checked cloths and basket-work chairs of exceeding discomfort
with orange cushions on them. It was the kind of place that specialized in morning coffee, five different
kinds of teas (Devonshire, Farmhouse, Fruit, Carlton and Plain), and a few sparing lunch dishes for
females such as scrambled eggs and shrimps and macaroni au gratin.

 The morning coffees were just getting under way. The manageress ushered us hastily into a very untidy
back sanctum.

 ‘Miss—eh—Merrion?’ inquired Crome.

 Miss Merrion bleated out in a high, distressed-gentlewoman voice:

 ‘That is my name. This is a most distressing business. Most distressing. How it will affect our business I
really cannotthink !’

 Miss Merrion was a very thin woman of forty with wispy orange hair (indeed she was astonishingly like a
ginger cat herself). She played nervously with various fichus and frills that were part of her official
costume.

 ‘You’ll have a boom,’ said Inspector Kelsey encouragingly. ‘You’ll see! You won’t be able to serve
teas fast enough!’

 ‘Disgusting,’ said Miss Merrion. ‘Truly disgusting. It makes one despair of human nature.’

 But her eyes brightened nevertheless.

 ‘What can you tell me about the dead girl, Miss Merrion?’

 ‘Nothing,’ said Miss Merrion positively. ‘Absolutely nothing!’

 ‘How long had she been working here?’

 ‘This was the second summer.’

 ‘You were satisfied with her?’

 ‘She was a good waitress—quick and obliging.’



 ‘She was pretty, yes?’ inquired Poirot.

 Miss Merrion, in her turn, gave him an ‘Oh, these foreigners’ look.

 ‘She was a nice, clean-looking girl,’ she said distantly.

 ‘What time did she go off duty last night?’ asked Crome.

 ‘Eight o’clock. We close at eight. We do not serve dinners. There is no demand for them. Scrambled
eggs and tea (Poirot shuddered) people come in for up to seven o’clock and sometimes after, but our
rush is over by 6.30.’

 ‘Did she mention to you how she proposed to spend her evening?’

 ‘Certainly not,’ said Miss Merrion emphatically. ‘We were not on those terms.’

 ‘No one came in and called for her? Anything like that?’

 ‘No.’

 ‘Did she seem quite her ordinary self? Not excited or depressed?’

 ‘Really I could not say,’ said Miss Merrion aloofly.

 ‘How many waitresses do you employ?’

 ‘Two normally, and an extra two after the 20th July until the end of August.’

 ‘But Elizabeth Barnard was not one of the extras?’

 ‘Miss Barnard was one of the regulars.’

 ‘What about the other one?’

 ‘Miss Higley? She is a very nice young lady.’

 ‘Were she and Miss Barnard friends?’

 ‘Really I could not say.’

 ‘Perhaps we’d better have a word with her.’

 ‘Now?’

 ‘If you please.’

 ‘I will send her to you,’ said Miss Merrion, rising. ‘Please keep her as short a time as possible. This is
the morning coffee rush hour.’

 The feline and gingery Miss Merrion left the room.



 ‘Very refined,’ remarked Inspector Kelsey. He mimicked the lady’s mincing tone.‘Really I could not
say.’

 A plump girl, slightly out of breath, with dark hair, rosy cheeks and dark eyes goggling with excitement,
bounced in.

 ‘Miss Merrion sent me,’ she announced breathlessly.

 ‘Miss Higley?’

 ‘Yes, that’s me.’

 ‘You knew Elizabeth Barnard?’

 ‘Oh, yes, I knew Betty. Isn’t itawful ? It’s just too awful! I can’t believe it’s true. I’ve been saying to the
girls all the morning I justcan’t believe it! “You know, girls,” I said, “it just doesn’t seemreal . Betty! I
mean, Betty Barnard, who’s been here all along,murdered ! I just can’t believe it,” I said. Five or six
times I’ve pinched myself just to see if I wouldn’t wake up. Betty murdered…It’s—well, you know what
I mean—it doesn’t seemreal .’

 ‘You knew the dead girl well?’ asked Crome.

 ‘Well, she’s worked here longer than I have. I only came this March. She was here last year. She was
rather quiet, if you know what I mean. She wasn’t one to joke or laugh a lot. I don’t mean that she was
exactlyquiet —she’d plenty of fun in her and all that—but she didn’t—well, she was quiet and she wasn’t
quiet, if you know what I mean.’

 I will say for Inspector Crome that he was exceedingly patient. As a witness the buxom Miss Higley was
persistently maddening. Every statement she made was repeated and qualified half a dozen times. The net
result was meagre in the extreme.

 She had not been on terms of intimacy with the dead girl. Elizabeth Barnard, it could be guessed, had
considered herself a cut above Miss Higley. She had been friendly in working hours, but the girls had not
seen much of her out of them. Elizabeth Barnard had had a ‘friend’ who worked at the estate agents near
the station. Court & Brunskill. No, he wasn’t Mr Court nor Mr Brunskill. He was a clerk there. She
didn’t know his name. But she knew him by sight well. Good-looking—oh, very good-looking, and
always so nicely dressed. Clearly, there was a tinge of jealousy in Miss Higley’s heart.

 In the end it boiled down to this. Elizabeth Barnard had not confided in anyone in the caféas to her plans
for the evening, but in Miss Higley’s opinion she had been going to meet her ‘friend’. She had had on a
new white dress, ‘ever so sweet with one of the new necks.’

 We had a word with each of the other two girls but with no further results. Betty Barnard had not said
anything as to her plans and no one had noticed her in Bexhill during the course of the evening.

 Chapter 10

 The Barnards

 Elizabeth Barnard’s parents lived in a minute bungalow, one of fifty or so recently run up by a
speculative builder on the confines of the town. The name of it was Llandudno. Mr Barnard, a stout,



bewildered-looking man of fifty-five or so, had noticed our approach and was standing waiting in the
doorway.

 ‘Come in, gentlemen,’ he said.

 Inspector Kelsey took the initiative.

 ‘This is Inspector Crome of Scotland Yard, sir,’ he said. ‘He’s come down to help us over this
business.’

 ‘Scotland Yard?’ said Mr Barnard hopefully. ‘That’s good. This murdering villain’s got to be laid by the
heels. My poor little girl—’ His face was distorted by a spasm of grief.

 ‘And this is Mr Hercule Poirot, also from London, and er—’

 ‘Captain Hastings,’ said Poirot.

 ‘Pleased to meet you, gentlemen,’ said Mr Barnard mechanically. ‘Come into the snuggery. I don’t
know that my poor wife’s up to seeing you. All broken up, she is.’

 However, by the time that we were ensconced in the living room of the bungalow, Mrs Barnard had
made her appearance. She had evidently been crying bitterly, her eyes were reddenedand she walked
with the uncertain gait of a person who had had a great shock.

 ‘Why, mother, that’s fine,’ said Mr Barnard. ‘You’re sure you’re all right—eh?’

 He patted her shoulder and drew her down into a chair.

 ‘The superintendent was very kind,’ said Mr Barnard. ‘After he’d broken the news to us, he said he’d
leave any questions till later when we’d got over the first shock.’

 ‘It is too cruel. Oh, it is too cruel,’ cried Mrs Barnard tearfully. ‘The cruellest thing that ever was, it is.’

 Her voice had a faintly sing-song intonation that I thought for a moment was foreign till I remembered the
name on the gate and realized that the ‘effer wass’ of her speech was in reality proof of her Welsh origin.

 ‘It’s very painful, madam, I know,’ said Inspector Crome. ‘And we’ve every sympathy for you, but we
want to know all the facts we can so as to get to work as quick as possible.’

 ‘That’s sense, that is,’ said Mr Barnard, nodding approval.

 ‘Your daughter was twenty-three, I understand. She lived here with you and worked at the Ginger Cat
café, is that right?’

 ‘That’s it.’

 ‘This is a new place, isn’t it? Where did you live before?’

 ‘I was in the ironmongery business in Kennington. Retired two years ago. Always meant to live near the
sea.’



 ‘You have two daughters?’

 ‘Yes. My elder daughter works in an office in London.’

 ‘Weren’t you alarmed when your daughter didn’t come home last night?’

 ‘We didn’t know she hadn’t,’ said Mrs Barnard tearfully. ‘Dad and I always go to bed early. Nine
o’clock’s our time. We never knew Betty hadn’t come home till the police officer came and said—and
said—’

 She broke down.

 ‘Was your daughter in the habit of—er—returning home late?’

 ‘You know what girls are nowadays, inspector,’ said Barnard. ‘Independent, that’s what they are.
These summer evenings they’re not going to rush home. All the same, Betty was usually in by eleven.’

 ‘How did she get in? Was the door open?’

 ‘Left the key under the mat—that’s what we always did.’

 ‘There is some rumour, I believe, that your daughter was engaged to be married?’

 ‘They don’t put it as formally as that nowadays,’ said Mr Barnard.

 ‘Donald Fraser his name is, and I liked him. I liked him very much,’ said Mrs Barnard. ‘Poor fellow, it’ll
be trouble for him—this news. Does he know yet, I wonder?’

 ‘He works in Court & Brunskill’s, I understand?’

 ‘Yes, they’re the estate agents.’

 ‘Was he in the habit of meeting your daughter most evenings after her work?’

 ‘Not every evening. Once or twice a week would be nearer.’

 ‘Do you know if she was going to meet him yesterday?’

 ‘She didn’t say. Betty never said much about what she was doing or where she was going. But she was
a good girl, Betty was. Oh, I can’t believe—’

 Mrs Barnard started sobbing again.

 ‘Pull yourself together, old lady. Try to hold up, mother,’ urged her husband. ‘We’ve got to get to the
bottom of this.’

 ‘I’m sure Donald would never—would never—’ sobbed Mrs Barnard.

 ‘Now just you pull yourself together,’ repeated Mr Barnard.

 ‘I wish to God I could give you some help—but the plain fact is I know nothing—nothing at all that can



help you to find the dastardly scoundrel who did this. Betty was just a merry, happy girl—with adecent
young fellow that she was—well, we’d have called it walking out with in my young days. Why anyone
should want to murder her simply beats me—it doesn’t make sense.’

 ‘You’re very near the truth there, Mr Barnard,’ said Crome. ‘I tell you what I’d like to do—have a look
over Miss Barnard’s room. There may be something—letters—or a diary.’

 ‘Look over it and welcome,’ said Mr Barnard, rising.

 He led the way. Crome followed him, then Poirot, then Kelsey, and I brought up the rear.

 I stopped for a minute to retie my shoelaces, and as I did so a taxi drew up outside and a girl jumped
out of it. She paid the driver and hurried up the path to the house, carrying a small suitcase. As she
entered the door she saw me and stopped dead.

 There was something so arresting in her pose that it intrigued me.

 ‘Who are you?’ she said.

 I came down a few steps. I felt embarrassed as to how exactly to reply. Should I give my name? Or
mention that I had come here with the police? The girl, however, gave me no time to make a decision.

 ‘Oh, well,’ she said, ‘I can guess.’

 She pulled off the little white woollen cap she was wearing and threw it on the ground. I could see her
better now as she turned a little so that the light fell on her.

 My first impression was of the Dutch dolls that my sisters used to play with in my childhood. Her hair
was black and cut in a straight bob and a bang across the forehead. Her cheek-bones were high and her
whole figure had a queer modern angularity that was not, somehow, unattractive. She was not
good-looking—plain rather—but there was an intensity about her, a forcefulness that made her a person
quite impossible to overlook.

 ‘You are Miss Barnard?’ I asked.

 ‘I am Megan Barnard. You belong to the police, I suppose?’

 ‘Well,’ I said. ‘Not exactly—’

 She interrupted me.

 ‘I don’t think I’ve got anything to say to you. My sister was a nice bright girl with no men friends. Good
morning.’

 She gave me a short laugh as she spoke and regarded me challengingly.

 ‘That’s the correct phrase, I believe?’ she said.

 ‘I’m not a reporter, if that’s what you’re getting at.’

 ‘Well, what are you?’ She looked around. ‘Where’s mum and dad?’



 ‘Your father is showing the police your sister’s bedroom. Your mother’s in there. She’s very upset.’

 The girl seemed to make a decision.

 ‘Come in here,’ she said.

 She pulled open a door and passed through. I followed her and found myself in a small, neat kitchen.

 I was about to shut the door behind me—but found an unexpected resistance. The next moment Poirot
had slipped quietly into the room and shut the door behind him.

 ‘Mademoiselle Barnard?’ he said with a quick bow.

 ‘This is M. Hercule Poirot,’ I said.

 Megan Barnard gave him a quick, appraising glance.

 ‘I’ve heard of you,’ she said. ‘You’re the fashionable private sleuth, aren’t you?’

 ‘Not a pretty description—but it suffices,’ said Poirot.

 The girl sat down on the edge of the kitchen table. She felt in her bag for a cigarette. She placed it
between her lips, lighted it, and then said in between two puffs of smoke:

 ‘Somehow, I don’t see what M. Hercule Poirot is doing in our humble little crime.’

 ‘Mademoiselle,’ said Poirot. ‘What you do not see and what I do not see would probably fill a volume.
But all that is of no practical importance. Whatis of practical importance is something that will not be easy
to find.’

 ‘What’s that?’

 ‘Death, mademoiselle, unfortunately creates aprejudice . A prejudice in favour of the deceased. I heard
what you said just now to my friend Hastings. “A nice bright girl with no men friends.” You said that in
mockery of the newspapers. And it is very true—when a young girl is dead, that is the kind of thing that
is said. She was bright. She was happy. She was sweet-tempered. She had not a care in the world. She
had no undesirable acquaintances. There is a great charity always to the dead. Do you know what I
should like this minute? I should like to find someone who knew Elizabeth Barnardand who does not
know she is dead ! Then, perhaps, I should hear what is useful to me—the truth.’

 Megan Barnard looked at him for a few minutes in silence whilst she smoked. Then, at last, she spoke.
Her words made me jump.

 ‘Betty,’ she said, ‘was an unmitigated little ass!’

 Chapter 11

 Megan Barnard

 As I said, Megan Barnard’s words, and still more the crisp businesslike tone in which they were uttered,



made me jump.

 Poirot, however, merely bowed his head gravely.

 ‘Ala bonne heure,’ he said. ‘You are intelligent, mademoiselle.’

 Megan Barnard said, still in the same detached tone:

 ‘I was extremely fond of Betty. But my fondness didn’t blind me from seeing exactly the kind of silly little
fool she was—and even telling her so upon occasions! Sisters are like that.’

 ‘And did she pay any attention to your advice?’

 ‘Probably not,’ said Megan cynically.

 ‘Will you, mademoiselle, be precise.’

 The girl hesitated for a minute or two.

 Poirot said with a slight smile:

 ‘I will help you. I heard what you said to Hastings.

 That your sister was a bright, happy girl with no men friends. It was—un peu—theopposite that was
true, was it not?’

 Megan said slowly:

 ‘There wasn’t any harm in Betty. I want you to understand that. She’d always go straight. She’s not the
weekending kind. Nothing of that sort. But she liked being taken out and dancing and—oh, cheap flattery
and compliments and all that sort of thing.’

 ‘And she was pretty—yes?’

 This question, the third time I had heard it, met this time with a practical response.

 Megan slipped off the table, went to her suitcase, snapped it open and extracted something which she
handed to Poirot.

 In a leather frame was a head and shoulders of a fair-haired, smiling girl. Her hair had evidently recently
been permed, it stood out from her head in a mass of rather frizzy curls. The smile was arch and artificial.
It was certainly not a face that you could call beautiful, but it had an obvious and cheap prettiness.

 Poirot handed it back, saying:

 ‘You and she do not resemble each other, mademoiselle.’

 ‘Oh! I’m the plain one of the family. I’ve always known that.’ She seemed to brush aside the fact as
unimportant.

 ‘In what way exactly do you consider your sister was behaving foolishly? Do you mean, perhaps, in



relation to Mr Donald Fraser?’

 ‘That’s it, exactly. Don’s a very quiet sort of person—but he—well, naturally he’d resent certain
things—and then—’

 ‘And then what, mademoiselle?’

 His eyes were on her very steadily.

 It may have been my fancy but it seemed to me that she hesitated a second before answering.

 ‘I was afraid that he might—chuck her altogether. And that would have been a pity. He’s a very steady
and hard-working man and would have made her a good husband.’

 Poirot continued to gaze at her. She did not flush under his glance but returned it with one of her own
equally steady and with something else in it—something that reminded me of her first defiant, disdainful
manner.

 ‘So it is like that,’ he said at last. ‘We do not speak the truth any longer.’

 She shrugged her shoulders and turned towards the door.

 ‘Well,’ she said. ‘I’ve done what I could to help you.’

 Poirot’s voice arrested her.

 ‘Wait, mademoiselle. I have something to tell you. Come back.’

 Rather unwillingly, I thought, she obeyed.

 Somewhat to my surprise, Poirot plunged into the whole story of the A B C letters, the murder of
Andover, and the railway guide found by the bodies.

 He had no reason to complain of any lack of interest on her part. Her lips parted, her eyes gleaming, she
hung on his words.

 ‘Is this all true, M. Poirot?’

 ‘Yes, it is true.’

 ‘You really mean that my sister was killed by some horrible homicidal maniac?’

 ‘Precisely?’

 She drew a deep breath.

 ‘Oh! Betty—Betty—how—howghastly !’

 ‘You see, mademoiselle, that the information for which I ask you can give freely without wondering
whether or not it will hurt anyone.’



 ‘Yes, I see that now.’

 ‘Then let us continue our conversation. I have formed the idea that this Donald Fraser has, perhaps, a
violent and jealous temper, is that right?’

 Megan Barnard said quietly:

 ‘I’m trusting you now, M. Poirot. I’m going to give you the absolute truth. Don is, as I say, a very quiet
person—a bottled-up person, if you know what I mean. He can’t always express what he feels in words.
But underneath it all he minds things terribly. And he’s got a jealous nature. He was always jealous of
Betty. He was devoted to her—and of course she was very fond of him, but it wasn’t in Betty to be fond
of one person and not notice anybody else. She wasn’t made that way. She’d got a—well, an eye for
any nice-looking man who’d pass the time of day with her. And of course, working in the Ginger Cat,
she was always running up against men—especially in the summer holidays. She was always very pat
with her tongue and if they chaffed her she’d chaff back again. And then perhaps she’d meet them and go
to the pictures or something like that. Nothing serious—never anything of that kind—but she just liked
her fun. She used to say that as she’d got to settle down with Don one day she might as well have her fun
now while she could.’

 Megan paused and Poirot said:

 ‘I understand. Continue.’

 ‘It was just that attitude of mind of hers that Don couldn’t understand. If she was really keen on him he
couldn’t see why she wanted to go out with other people. And once or twice they had flaming big rows
about it.’

 ‘M. Don, he was no longer quiet?’

 ‘It’s like all those quiet people, when they do lose their tempers they lose them with a vengeance. Don
was so violent that Betty was frightened.’

 ‘When was this?’

 ‘There was one row nearly a year ago and another—a worse one—just over a month ago. I was home
for the weekend—and I got them to patch it up again, and it was then I tried to knock a little sense into
Betty—told her she was a little fool. All she would say was that there hadn’t been any harm in it. Well,
that was true enough, but all the same she was riding for a fall. You see, after the row a year ago, she’d
got into the habit of telling a few useful lies on the principle that what the mind doesn’t know the heart
doesn’t grieve over. This last flare-up came because she’d told Don she was going to Hastings to see a
girl pal—and he found out that she’d really been over to Eastbourne with some man. He was a married
man, as it happened, and he’d been a bit secretive about the business anyway—and so that made it
worse. They had an awful scene—Betty saying that she wasn’t married to him yet and she had a right to
go about with whom she pleased and Don all white and shaking and saying that one day—one day—’

 ‘Yes?’

 ‘He’d commit murder—’ said Megan in a lowered voice.

 She stopped and stared at Poirot.



 He nodded his head gravely several times.

 ‘And so, naturally, you were afraid…’

 ‘I didn’t think he’d actually done it—not for a minute! But I was afraid it might be brought up—the
quarrel and all that he’d said—several people knew about it.’

 Again Poirot nodded his head gravely.

 ‘Just so. And I may say, mademoiselle, that but for the egoistical vanity of a killer, that is just what would
have happened. If Donald Fraser escapes suspicion, it will be thanks to A B C’s maniacal boasting.’

 He was silent for a minute or two, then he said:

 ‘Do you know if your sister met this married man, or any other man, lately?’

 Megan shook her head.

 ‘I don’t know. I’ve been away, you see.’

 ‘But what do you think?’

 ‘She mayn’t have met that particular man again. He’d probably sheer off if he thought there was a
chance of a row, but it wouldn’t surprise me if Betty had—well, been telling Don a few lies again. You
see, she did so enjoy dancing and the pictures, and of course, Don couldn’t afford to take her all the
time.’

 ‘If so, is she likely to have confided in anyone? The girl at the café, for instance?’

 ‘I don’t think that’s likely. Betty couldn’t bear the Higley girl. She thought her common. And the others
would be new. Betty wasn’t the confiding sort anyway.’

 An electric bell trilled sharply above the girl’s head.

 She went to the window and leaned out. She drew back her head sharply.

 ‘It’s Don…’

 ‘Bring him in here,’ said Poirot quickly. ‘I would like a word with him before our good inspector takes
him in hand.’

 Like a flash Megan Barnard was out of the kitchen, and a couple of seconds later she was back again
leading Donald Fraser by the hand.

 Chapter 12

 Donald Fraser

 I felt sorry at once for the young man. His white haggard face and bewildered eyes showed how great a
shock he had had.



 He was a well-made, fine-looking young fellow, standing close on six foot, not good-looking, but with a
pleasant, freckled face, high cheek-bones and flaming red hair.

 ‘What’s this, Megan?’ he said. ‘Why in here? For God’s sake, tell me—I’ve only just heard—Betty…’

 His voice trailed away.

 Poirot pushed forward a chair and he sank down on it.

 My friend then extracted a small flask from his pocket, poured some of its contents into a convenient
cup which was hanging on the dresser and said:

 ‘Drink some of this, Mr Fraser. It will do you good.’

 The young man obeyed. The brandy brought a little colour back into his face. He sat up straighter and
turned once more to the girl. His manner was quite quiet and self-controlled.

 ‘It’s true, I suppose?’ he said. ‘Betty is—dead—killed?’

 ‘It’s true, Don.’

 He said as though mechanically:

 ‘Have you just come down from London?’

 ‘Yes. Dad phoned me.’

 ‘By the 9.30, I suppose?’ said Donald Fraser.

 His mind, shrinking from reality, ran for safety along these unimportant details.

 ‘Yes.’

 There was silence for a minute or two, then Fraser said:

 ‘The police? Are they doing anything?’

 ‘They’re upstairs now. Looking through Betty’s things, I suppose.’

 ‘They’ve no idea who—? They don’t know—?’

 He stopped.

 He had all a sensitive, shy person’s dislike of putting violent facts into words.

 Poirot moved forward a little and asked a question. He spoke in a businesslike, matter-of-fact voice as
though what he asked was an unimportant detail.

 ‘Did Miss Barnard tell you where she was going last night?’

 Fraser replied to the question. He seemed to be speaking mechanically:



 ‘She told me she was going with a girl friend to St Leonards.’

 ‘Did you believe her?’

 ‘I—’ Suddenly the automaton came to life. ‘What the devil do you mean?’

 His face then, menacing, convulsed by sudden passion, made me understand that a girl might well be
afraid of rousing his anger.

 Poirot said crisply:

 ‘Betty Barnard was killed by a homicidal murderer. Only by speaking the exact truth can you help us to
get on his track.’

 His glance for a minute turned to Megan.

 ‘That’s right, Don,’ she said. ‘It isn’t a time for considering one’s own feelings or anyone else’s. You’ve
got to come clean.’

 Donald Fraser looked suspiciously at Poirot.

 ‘Who are you? You don’t belong to the police?’

 ‘I am better than the police,’ said Poirot. He said it without conscious arrogance. It was, to him, a simple
statement of fact.

 ‘Tell him,’ said Megan.

 Donald Fraser capitulated.

 ‘I—wasn’t sure,’ he said. ‘I believed her when she said it. Never thought of doing anything else.
Afterwards— perhaps it was something in her manner. I—I, well, I began to wonder.’

 ‘Yes?’ said Poirot.

 He had sat down opposite Donald Fraser. His eyes, fixed on the other man’s, seemed to be exercising a
mesmeric spell.

 ‘I was ashamed of myself for being so suspicious. But—but Iwas suspicious…I thought of going to the
front and watching her when she left the café. I actually went there. Then I felt I couldn’t do that. Betty
would see me and she’d be angry. She’d realize at once that I was watching her.’

 ‘What did you do?’

 ‘I went over to St Leonards. Got over there by eight o’clock. Then I watched the buses—to see if she
were in them…But there was no sign of her…’

 ‘And then?’

 ‘I—I lost my head rather. I was convinced she was with some man. I thought it probable he had taken



her in his car to Hastings. I went on there—looked in hotels and restaurants, hung round cinemas—went
on the pier. All damn foolishness. Even if she was there I was unlikely to find her, and anyway, there
were heaps of other places he might have taken her to instead of Hastings.’

 He stopped. Precise as his tone had remained, I caught an undertone of that blind, bewildering misery
and anger that had possessed him at the time he described.

 ‘In the end I gave it up—came back.’

 ‘At what time?’

 ‘I don’t know. I walked. It must have been midnight or after when I got home.’

 ‘Then—’

 The kitchen door opened.

 ‘Oh, there you are,’ said Inspector Kelsey.

 Inspector Crome pushed past him, shot a glance at Poirot and a glance at the two strangers.

 ‘Miss Megan Barnard and Mr Donald Fraser,’ said Poirot, introducing them.

 ‘This is Inspector Crome from London,’ he explained.

 Turning to the inspector, he said:

 ‘While you pursued your investigations upstairs I have been conversing with Miss Barnardand Mr
Fraser, endeavouring if I could to find something that will throw light upon the matter.’

 ‘Oh, yes?’ said Inspector Crome, his thoughts not upon Poirot but upon the two newcomers.

 Poirot retreated to the hall. Inspector Kelsey said kindly as he passed:

 ‘Get anything?’

 But his attention was distracted by his colleague and he did not wait for a reply.

 I joined Poirot in the hall.

 ‘Did anything strike you, Poirot?’ I inquired.

 ‘Only the amazing magnanimity of the murderer, Hastings.’

 I had not the courage to say that I had not the least idea what he meant.

 Chapter 13

 A Conference

 Conferences!



 Much of my memories of the A B C case seem to be of conferences.

 Conferences at Scotland Yard. At Poirot’s rooms. Official conferences. Unofficial conferences.

 This particular conference was to decide whether or not the facts relative to the anonymous letters
should or should not be made public in the press.

 The Bexhill murder had attracted much more attention than the Andover one.

 It had, of course, far more elements of popularity. To begin with the victim was a young and
good-looking girl. Also, it had taken place at a popular seaside resort.

 All the details of the crime were reported fully and rehashed daily in thin disguises. The A B C railway
guide came in for its share of attention. The favourite theory was that it had been bought locally by the
murderer and that it was a valuable clue to his identity. It also seemed to show that he had come to the
place by train and was intending to leave for London.

 The railway guide had not figured at all in the meagre accounts of the Andover murder, so there seemed
at present little likelihood of the two crimes being connected in the public eye.

 ‘We’ve got to decide upon a policy,’ said the Assistant Commissioner. ‘The thing is—which way will
give us the best results? Shall we give the public the facts—enlist their co-operation—after all, it’ll be the
co-operation of several million people, looking out for a madman—’

 ‘He won’t look like a madman,’ interjected Dr Thompson.

 ‘—looking out for sales of A B C’s—and so on. Against that I suppose there’s the advantage of
working in the dark—not letting our man know what we’re up to, but then there’s the fact thathe knows
very well that we know . He’s drawn attention to himself deliberately by his letters. Eh, Crome, what’s
your opinion?’

 ‘I look at it this way, sir. If you make it public,you’re playing A B C’s game . That’s what he
wants—publicity—notoriety. That’s what he’s out after. I’m right, aren’t I, doctor? He wants to make a
splash.’

 Thompson nodded.

 The Assistant Commissioner said thoughtfully:

 ‘So you’re for balking him. Refusing him the publicity he’s hankering after. What about you, M. Poirot?’

 Poirot did not speak for a minute. When he did it was with an air of choosing his words carefully.

 ‘It is difficult for me, Sir Lionel,’ he said. ‘I am, as you might say, an interested party. The challenge was
sent to me. If I say “Suppress that fact—do not make it public,” may it not be thought that it is my vanity
that speaks? That I am afraid for my reputation? It is difficult! To speak out—to tell all—that has its
advantages. It is, at least, a warning…On the other hand, I am as convinced as Inspector Cromethat it is
what the murderer wants us to do .’

 ‘H’m!’ said the Assistant Commissioner, rubbing his chin. He looked across at Dr Thompson. ‘Suppose



we refuse our lunatic the satisfaction of the publicity he craves. What’s he likely to do?’

 ‘Commit another crime,’ said the doctor promptly.

 ‘Force your hand.’

 ‘And if we splash the thing about in headlines. Then what’s his reaction?’

 ‘Same answer. One way youfeed his megalomania, the other youbalk it. The result’s the same. Another
crime.’

 ‘What do you say, M. Poirot?’

 ‘I agree with Dr Thompson.’

 ‘A cleft stick—eh? How many crimes do you think this—lunatic has in mind?’

 Dr Thompson looked across at Poirot.

 ‘Looks like A to Z,’ he said cheerfully.

 ‘Of course,’ he went on, ‘he won’t get there. Not nearly. You’ll have him by the heels long before that.
Interesting to know how he’d have dealt with the letter X.’ He recalled himself guiltily from this purely
enjoyable speculation. ‘But you’ll have him long before that. G or H, let’s say.’

 The Assistant Commissioner struck the table with his fist.

 ‘My God, are you telling me we’re going to have five more murders?’

 ‘It won’t be as much as that, sir,’ said Inspector Crome. ‘Trust me.’

 He spoke with confidence.

 ‘Which letter of the alphabet do you place it at, inspector?’ asked Poirot.

 There was a slight ironic note in his voice. Crome, I thought, looked at him with a tinge of dislike
adulterating the usual calm superiority.

 ‘Might get him next time, M. Poirot. At any rate, I’d guarantee to get him by the time he gets to F.’

 He turned to the Assistant Commissioner.

 ‘I think I’ve got the psychology of the case fairly clear. Dr Thompson will correct me if I’m wrong. I
take it that every time A B C brings a crime off, his self-confidence increases about a hundred per cent.
Every time he feels “I’m clever—they can’t catch me!” he becomes so over-weeningly confident that he
also becomes careless. He exaggerates his own cleverness and everyone else’s stupidity. Very soon he’d
be hardly bothering to take any precautions at all. That’s right, isn’t it, doctor?’

 Thompson nodded.

 ‘That’s usually the case. In non-medical terms it couldn’t have been put better. You know something



about such things, M. Poirot. Don’t you agree?’

 I don’t think that Crome liked Thompson’s appeal to Poirot. He considered that he and he only was the
expert on this subject.

 ‘It is as Inspector Crome says,’ agreed Poirot.

 ‘Paranoia,’ murmured the doctor.

 Poirot turned to Crome.

 ‘Are there any material facts of interest in the Bexhill case?’

 ‘Nothing very definite. A waiter at the Splendide at Eastbourne recognizes the dead girl’s photograph as
that of a young woman who dined there on the evening of the 24th in company with a middle-aged man
in spectacles. It’s also been recognized at a roadhouse place called the Scarlet Runner halfway between
Bexhill and London. They say she was there about 9 pm on the 24th with a man who looked like a naval
officer. They can’t both be right, but either of them’s probable. Of course, there’s a host of other
identifications, but most of them not good for much. We haven’t been able to trace the A B C.’

 ‘Well, you seem to be doing all that can be done, Crome,’ said the Assistant Commissioner. ‘What do
you say, M. Poirot? Does any line of inquiry suggest itself to you?’

 Poirot said slowly:

 ‘It seems to me that there is one very important clue—the discovery of the motive.’

 ‘Isn’t that pretty obvious? An alphabetical complex. Isn’t that what you called it, doctor?’

 ‘C¸a, oui,’ said Poirot. ‘There is an alphabetical complex. But why an alphabetical complex? A madman
in particular has always a very strong reason for the crimes he commits.’

 ‘Come, come, M. Poirot,’ said Crome. ‘Look at Stoneman in 1929. He ended by trying to do away
with anyone who annoyed him in the slightest degree.’

 Poirot turned to him.

 ‘Quite so. But if you are a sufficiently great and important person, it is necessary that you should be
spared small annoyances. If a fly settles on your forehead again and again, maddening you by its
tickling—what do you do? You endeavour to kill that fly. You have no qualms about it.You are
important—the fly is not. You kill the fly and the annoyance ceases. Your action appears to you sane and
justifiable. Another reason for killing a fly is if you have a strong passion for hygiene. The fly is a potential
source of danger to the community—the fly must go. So works the mind of the mentally deranged
criminal. But consider now this case—if the victims are alphabetically selected, then they are not being
removed because they are a source of annoyance to the murderer personally. It would be too much of a
coincidence to combine the two.’

 ‘That’s a point,’ said Dr Thompson. ‘I remember a case where a woman’s husband was condemned to
death. She started killing the members of the jury one by one. Quite a time before the crimes were
connected up. They seemed entirely haphazard. But as M. Poirot says, there isn’t such a thing as a
murderer who commits crimes atrandom . Either he removes people who stand (however insignificantly)



in his path, or else he kills byconviction . He removes clergymen, or policemen, or prostitutes because he
firmly believes that theyshould be removed. That doesn’t apply here either as far as I can see. Mrs
Ascher and Betty Barnard cannot be linked as members of the same class. Of course, it’s possible that
there is a sex complex. Both victims have been women. We can tell better, of course, after the next
crime—’

 ‘For God’s sake, Thompson, don’t speak so glibly of the next crime,’ said Sir Lionel irritably. ‘We’re
going to do all we can to prevent another crime.’

 Dr Thompson held his peace and blew his nose with some violence.

 ‘Have it your own way,’ the noise seemed to say. ‘If you won’t face facts—’

 The Assistant Commissioner turned to Poirot.

 ‘I see what you’re driving at, but I’m not quite clear yet.’

 ‘I ask myself,’ said Poirot, ‘what passes exactly in the mind of the murderer? He kills, it would seem
from his letters,pour le sport —to amuse himself. Can that really be true? And even if it is true, on what
principle does he select his victimsapart from the merely alphabetical one? If he kills merely to amuse
himself he would not advertise the fact, since, otherwise, he could kill with impunity. But no, he seeks, as
we all agree, to make the splash in the public eye—to assert his personality. In what way has his
personality been suppressed that one can connect with the two victims he has so far selected? A final
suggestion: Is his motive direct personal hatred ofme , of Hercule Poirot? Does he challenge me in public
because I have (unknown to myself) vanquished him somewhere in the course of my career? Or is his
animosity impersonal—directed against aforeigner? And if so, what again has led to that? What injury has
he suffered at a foreigner’s hand?’

 ‘All very suggestive questions,’ said Dr Thompson.

 Inspector Crome cleared his throat.

 ‘Oh, yes? A little unanswerable at present, perhaps.’

 ‘Nevertheless, my friend,’ said Poirot, looking straight at him,‘it is there, in those questions, that the
solution lies . If we knew the exact reason—fantastic, perhaps, to us—but logical to him—ofwhy our
madman commits these crimes, we should know, perhaps, who the next victim is likely to be.’

 Crome shook his head.

 ‘He selects them haphazard—that’s my opinion.’

 ‘The magnanimous murderer,’ said Poirot.

 ‘What’s that you say?’

 ‘I said—the magnanimous murderer! Franz Ascher would have been arrested for the murder of his
wife—Donald Fraser might have been arrested for the murder of Betty Barnard—if it had not been for
the warning letters of A B C. Is he, then, so soft-hearted that he cannot bear others to suffer for
something they did not do?’



 ‘I’ve known stranger things happen,’ said Dr Thompson. ‘I’ve known men who’ve killed half a dozen
victims all broken up because one of their victims didn’t die instantaneously and suffered pain. All the
same, I don’t think that that is our fellow’s reason. He wants the credit of these crimes for his own
honour and glory. That’s the explanation that fits best.’

 ‘We’ve come to no decision about the publicity business,’ said the Assistant Commissioner.

 ‘If I may make a suggestion, sir,’ said Crome. ‘Why not wait till the receipt of the next letter? Make it
public then—special editions, etc. It will make a bit of a panic in the particular town named, but it will put
everyone whose name begins with C on their guard, and it’ll put A B C on his mettle. He’ll be
determined to succeed. And that’s when we’ll get him.’

 How little we knew what the future held.

 Chapter 14

 The Third Letter

 I well remember the arrival of A B C’s third letter.

 I may say that all precautions had been taken so that when A B C resumed his campaign there should be
no unnecessary delays. A young sergeant from Scotland Yard was attached to the house and if Poirot
and I were out it was his duty to open anything that came so as to be able to communicate with
headquarters without loss of time.

 As the days succeeded each other we had all grown more and more on edge. Inspector Crome’s aloof
and superior manner grew more and more aloof and superior as one by one his more hopeful clues
petered out. The vague descriptions of men said to have been seen with Betty Barnard proved useless.
Various cars noticed in the vicinity of Bexhill and Cooden were either accounted for or could not be
traced. The investigation of purchases of A B C railway guides caused inconvenience and trouble to
heaps of innocent people.

 As for ourselves, each time the postman’s familiar rat-tat sounded on the door, our hearts beat faster
with apprehension. At least that was true for me, and I cannot but believe that Poirot experienced the
same sensation.

 He was, I knew, deeply unhappy over the case. He refused to leave London, preferring to be on the
spot in case of emergency. In those hot dog days even his moustaches drooped—neglected for once by
their owner.

 It was on a Friday that A B C’s third letter came. The evening post arrived about ten o’clock.

 When we heard the familiar step and the brisk rat-tat, I rose and went along to the box. There were four
or five letters, I remember. The last one I looked at was addressed in printed characters.

 ‘Poirot,’ I cried…My voice died away.

 ‘It has come? Open it, Hastings. Quickly. Every moment may be needed. We must make our plans.’

 I tore open the letter (Poirot for once did not reproach me with untidiness) and extracted the printed
sheet.



 ‘Read it,’ said Poirot.

 I read aloud:

 Poor Mr Poirot,—Not so good at these little criminal matters as you thought yourself, are you? Rather
past your prime, perhaps? Let us see if you can do any better this time. This time it’s an easy one.
Churston on the 30th. Do try and do something about it! It’s a bit dull having it all my own way, you
know!

 Good hunting. Ever yours,

 A B C.

 ‘Churston,’ I said, jumping to our own copy of an A B C. ‘Let’s see where it is.’

 ‘Hastings,’ Poirot’s voice came sharply and interrupted me. ‘When was that letter written? Is there a
date on it?’

 I glanced at the letter in my hand.

 ‘Written on the 27th,’ I announced.

 ‘Did I hear you aright, Hastings? Did he give the date of the murder as the30th ?’

 ‘That’s right. Let me see, that’s—’

 ‘Bon Dieu, Hastings—do you not realise?Today is the 30th .’

 His eloquent hand pointed to the calendar on the wall. I caught up the daily paper to confirm it.

 ‘But why—how—’ I stammered.

 Poirot caught up the torn envelope from the floor. Something unusual about the address had registered
itself vaguely in my brain, but I had been too anxious to get at the contents of the letter to pay more than
fleeting attention to it.

 Poirot was at the time living in Whitehaven Mansions. The address ran:M. Hercule Poirot, Whitehorse
Mansions , across the corner was scrawled:‘Not known at Whitehorse Mansions, EC1, nor at
Whitehorse Court—try Whitehaven Mansions.’

 ‘Mon Dieu!’ murmured Poirot. ‘Does even chance aid this madman?Vite—vite —we must get on to
Scotland Yard.’

 A minute or two later we were speaking to Crome over the wire. For once the self-controlled inspector
did not reply ‘Oh, yes?’ Instead a quickly stifled curse came to his lips. He heard what we had to say,
then rang off in order to get a trunk connection to Churston as rapidly as possible.

 ‘C’est trop tard,’ murmured Poirot.

 ‘You can’t be sure of that,’ I argued, though without any great hope.



 He glanced at the clock.

 ‘Twenty minutes past ten? An hour and forty minutes to go. Is it likely that A B C will have held his hand
so long?’

 I opened the railway guide I had previously taken from its shelf.

 ‘Churston, Devon,’ I read, ‘from Paddington 204 3/4 miles. Population 656. It sounds a fairly small
place. Surely our man will be bound to be noticed there.’

 ‘Even so, another life will have been taken,’ murmured Poirot. ‘What are the trains? I imagine train will
be quicker than car.’

 ‘There’s a midnight train—sleeping car to Newton Abbot—gets there 6.8 am, and then Churston at
7.15.’

 ‘That is from Paddington?’

 ‘Paddington, yes.’

 ‘We will take that, Hastings.’

 ‘You’ll hardly have time to get news before we start.’

 ‘If we receive bad news tonight or tomorrow morning does it matter which?’

 ‘There’s something in that.’

 I put a few things together in a suitcase while Poirot once more rang up Scotland Yard.

 A few minutes later he came into the bedroom and demanded:

 ‘Mais qu’est ce que vous faites là?’

 ‘I was packing for you. I thought it would save time.’

 ‘Vous éprouvez trop d’émotion, Hastings. It affects your hands and your wits. Is that a way to fold a
coat? And regard what you have done to my pyjamas. If the hairwash breaks what will befall them?’

 ‘Good heavens, Poirot,’ I cried, ‘this is a matter of life and death. What does it matter what happens to
our clothes?’

 ‘You have no sense of proportion, Hastings. We cannot catch a train earlier than the time that it leaves,
and to ruin one’s clothes will not be the least helpful in preventing a murder.’

 Taking his suitcase from me firmly, he took the packing into his own hands.

 He explained that we were to take the letter and envelope to Paddington with us. Someone from
Scotland Yard would meet us there.



 When we arrived on the platform the first person we saw was Inspector Crome.

 He answered Poirot’s look of inquiry.

 ‘No news as yet. All men available are on the lookout. All persons whose name begins with C are being
warned by phone when possible. There’s just a chance. Where’s the letter?’

 Poirot gave it to him.

 He examined it, swearing softly under his breath.

 ‘Of all the damned luck. The stars in their courses fight for the fellow.’

 ‘You don’t think,’ I suggested, ‘that it was done on purpose?’

 Crome shook his head.

 ‘No. He’s got his rules—crazy rules—and abides by them. Fair warning. He makes a point of that.
That’s where his boastfulness comes in. I wonder now—I’d almost bet the chap drinks White Horse
whisky.’

 ‘Ah, c’est ingénieux, c¸a!’ said Poirot, driven to admiration in spite of himself. ‘He prints the letter and
the bottle is in front of him.’

 ‘That’s the way of it,’ said Crome. ‘We’ve all of us done much the same thing one time or another,
unconsciously copied something that’s just under the eye. He started off White and went on horse instead
of haven…’

 The inspector, we found, was also travelling by the train.

 ‘Even if by some unbelievable luck nothing happened, Churston is the place to be. Our murderer is
there, or has been there today. One of my men is on the phone here up to the last minute in case anything
comes through.’

 Just as the train was leaving the station we saw a man running down the platform. He reached the
inspector’s window and called up something.

 As the train drew out of the station Poirot and I hurried along the corridor and tapped on the door of the
inspector’s sleeper.

 ‘You have news—yes?’ demanded Poirot.

 Crome said quietly:

 ‘It’s about as bad as it can be. Sir Carmichael Clarke has been found with his head bashed in.’

 Sir Carmichael Clarke, although his name was not very well known to the general public, was a man of
some eminence. He had been in his time a very well-known throat specialist. Retiring from his profession
very comfortably off, he had been able to indulge what had been one of the chief passions of his life—a
collection of Chinese pottery and porcelain. A few years later, inheriting a considerable fortune from an
elderly uncle, he had been able to indulge his passion to the full, and he was now the possessor of one of



the best-known collections of Chinese art. He was married but had no children and lived in a house he
had built for himself near the Devon coast, only coming to London on rare occasions such as when some
important sale was on.

 It did not require much reflection to realize that his death, following that of the young and pretty Betty
Barnard, would provide the best newspaper sensation for years. The fact that it was August and that the
papers were hard up for subject matter would make matters worse.

 ‘Eh bien,’ said Poirot. ‘It is possible that publicity may do what private efforts have failed to do. The
whole country now will be looking for A B C.’

 ‘Unfortunately,’ I said, ‘that’s what he wants.’

 ‘True. But it may, all the same, be his undoing. Gratified by success, he may become careless…That is
what I hope—that he may be drunk with his own cleverness.’

 ‘How odd all this is, Poirot,’ I exclaimed, struck suddenly by an idea. ‘Do you know, this is the first
crime of this kind that you and I have worked on together? All our murders have been—well, private
murders, so to speak.’

 ‘You are quite right, my friend. Always, up to now, it has fallen to our lot to work from theinside . It has
been the history of thevictim that was important. The important points have been: “Who benefited by the
death? What opportunities had those round him to commit the crime?” It has always been the“crime
intime” . Here, for the first time in our association, it is cold-blooded, impersonal murder. Murder from
theoutside .’

 I shivered.

 ‘It’s rather horrible…’

 ‘Yes. I felt from the first, when I read the original letter, that there was something wrong—misshapen…’

 He made an impatient gesture.

 ‘One must not give way to the nerves…This is no worse than any ordinary crime…’

 ‘It is…It is…’

 ‘Is it worse to take the life or lives of strangers than to take the life of someone near and dear to
you—someone who trusts and believes in you, perhaps?’

 ‘It’s worse because it’smad …’

 ‘No, Hastings. It is notworse . It is only moredifficult .’

 ‘No, no, I do not agree with you. It’s infinitely more frightening.’

 Hercule Poirot said thoughtfully:

 ‘It should be easier to discover because it is mad. A crime committed by someone shrewd and sane
would be far more complicated. Here, if one could but hit on theidea …This alphabetical business, it has



discrepancies. If I could once see theidea —then everything would be clear and simple…’

 He sighed and shook his head.

 ‘These crimes must not go on. Soon, soon, I must see the truth…Go, Hastings. Get some sleep. There
will be much to do tomorrow.’

 Chapter 15

 Sir Carmichael Clarke

 Churston, lying as it does between Brixham on the one side and Paignton and Torquay on the other,
occupies a position about halfway round the curve of Torbay. Until about ten years ago it was merely a
golf links and below the links a green sweep of countryside dropping down to the sea with only a
farmhouse or two in the way of human occupation. But of late years there had been big building
developments between Churston and Paignton and the coastline is now dotted with small houses and
bungalows, new roads, etc.

 Sir Carmichael Clarke had purchased a site of some two acres commanding an uninterrupted view of the
sea. The house he had built was of modern design—a white rectangle that was not unpleasing to the eye.
Apart from two big galleries that housed his collection it was not a large house.

 Our arrival there took place about 8 am. A local police officer had met us at the station and had put usau
courant of the situation.

 Sir Carmichael Clarke, it seemed, had been in the habit of taking a stroll after dinner every evening.
When the police rang up—at some time after eleven—it was ascertained that he had not returned. Since
his stroll usually followed the same course, it was not long before a search-party discovered his body.
Death was due to a crashing blow with some heavy instrument on the back of the head.An open A B C
had been placed face downwards on the dead body .

 We arrived at Combeside (as the house was called) at about eight o’clock. The door was opened by an
elderly butler whose shaking hands and disturbed face showed how much the tragedy had affected him.

 ‘Good morning, Deveril,’ said the police officer.

 ‘Good morning, Mr Wells.’

 ‘These are the gentlemen from London, Deveril.’

 ‘This way, gentlemen.’ He ushered us into a long dining-room where breakfast was laid. ‘I’ll get FranklinClarke.’

 A Minute or two later a big fair-haired man with a sunburnt face entered the room.

 This was FranklinClarke, the dead man’s only brother.

 He had the resolute competent manner of a man acA.B.Customed to meeting with emergencies.

 ‘Good morning, gentlemen.’



 Inspector Wells made the introductions.

 ‘This is Inspector Crome of the CID, Mr Hercule Poirot and—er—Captain Hayter.’

 ‘Hastings,’ I corrected coldly.

 FranklinClarke shook hands with each of us in turn and in each case the handshake was accompanied
by a piercing look.

 ‘Let me offer you some breakfast,’ he said. ‘We can discuss the position as we eat.’

 There were no dissentient voices and we were soon doing justice to excellent eggs and bacon and
coffee.

 ‘Now for it,’ said FranklinClarke. ‘Inspector Wells gave me a rough idea of the position last
night—though I may say it seemed one of the wildest tales I have ever heard. Am I really to believe,
Inspector Crome, that my poor brother is the victim of a homicidal maniac, that this is the third murder
that has occurred and thatin each case an A B C railway guide has been deposited beside the body ?’

 ‘That is substantially the position, FranklinClarke.’

 ‘Butwhy? What earthly benefit can accrue from such a crime—even in the most diseased imagination?’

 Poirot nodded his head in approval.

 ‘You go straight to the point, FranklinClarke,’ he said.

 ‘It’s not much good looking for motives at this stage, FranklinClarke,’ said Inspector Crome. ‘That’s a
matter for an alienist—though I may say that I’ve had a certain experience of criminal lunacy and that the
motives are usually grossly inadequate. There is a desire to assert one’s personality, to make a splash in
the public eye—in fact, to be a somebody instead of a nonentity.’

 ‘Is that true, M. Poirot?’

 FranklinClarke seemed incredulous. His appeal to the older man was not too well received by Inspector Crome,
who frowned.

 ‘Absolutely true,’ replied my friend.

 ‘At any rate such a man cannot escape detection long,’ said FranklinClarke thoughtfully.

 ‘Vous croyez?Ah, but they are cunning—ces gens là!And you must remembersuch a type has usually all
the outer signs of insignificance —he belongs to the class of person who is usually passed over and
ignored or even laughed at!’

 ‘Will you let me have a few facts, please, FranklinClarke,’ said Crome, breaking in on the conversation.

 ‘Certainly.’

 ‘Your brother, I take it, was in his usual health and spirits yesterday? He received no unexpected letters?
Nothing to upset him?’



 ‘No. I should say he was quite his usual self.’

 ‘Not upset and worried in any way.’

 ‘Excuse me, inspector. I didn’t say that. To be upset and worried was my poor brother’s normal
condition.’

 ‘Why was that?’

 ‘You may not know that my sister-in-law, Lady Clarke, is in very bad health. Frankly, between
ourselves, she is suffering from an incurable cancer, and cannot live very much longer. Her illness has
preyed terribly on my brother’s mind. I myself returned from the East not long ago and I was shocked at
the change in him.’

 Poirot interpolated a question.

 ‘Supposing, FranklinClarke, that your brother had been found shot at the foot of a cliff—or shot with a
revolver beside him. What would have been your first thought?’

 ‘Quite frankly, I should have jumped to the conclusion that it was suicide,’ said FranklinClarke.

 ‘Encore!’ said Poirot.

 ‘What is that?’

 ‘A fact that repeats itself. It is of no matter.’

 ‘Anyway, itwasn’t suicide,’ said Crome with a touch of curtness. ‘Now I believe, FranklinClarke, that it was
your brother’s habit to go for a stroll every evening?’

 ‘Quite right. He always did.’

 ‘Every night?’

 ‘Well, not if it was pouring with rain, naturally.’

 ‘And everyone in the house knew of this habit?’

 ‘Of course.’

 ‘And outside?’

 ‘I don’t quite know what you mean by outside. The gardener may have been aware of it or not, I don’t
know.’

 ‘And in the village?’

 ‘Strictly speaking, we haven’t got a village. There’s a post office and cottages at Churston Ferrers—but
there’s no village or shops.’



 ‘I suppose a stranger hanging round the place would be fairly easily noticed?’

 ‘On the contrary. In August all this part of the world is a seething mass of strangers. They come over
every day from Brixham and Torquay and Paignton in cars and buses and on foot. Broadsands, which is
down there (he pointed), is a very popular beach and so is Elbury Cove—it’s a well-known beauty spot
and people come there and picnic. I wish they didn’t! You’ve no idea how beautiful and peaceful this
part of the world is in June and the beginning of July.’

 ‘So you don’t think a stranger would be noticed?’

 ‘Not unless he looked—well, off his head.’

 ‘This man doesn’t look off his head,’ said Crome with certainty. ‘You see what I’m getting at, FranklinClarke. This man must have been spying out the land before hand and discovered your brother’s habit of
taking an evening stroll. I suppose, by the way, that no strange man came up to the house and asked to
see Sir Carmichael yesterday?’

 ‘Not that I know of—but we’ll ask Deveril.’

 He rang the bell and put the question to the butler.

 ‘No, sir, no one came to see Sir Carmichael. And I didn’t notice anyone hanging about the house either.
No more did the maids, because I’ve asked them.’

 The butler waited a moment, then inquired: ‘Is that all, sir?’

 ‘Yes, Deveril, you can go.’

 The butler withdrew, drawing back in the doorway to let a young woman pass.

 FranklinClarke rose as she came in.

 ‘This is Miss Grey, gentlemen. My brother’s secretary.’

 My attention was caught at once by the girl’s extraordinary Scandinavian fairness. She had the almost
colourless ash hair—light-grey eyes—and transparent glowing pallor that one finds amongst Norwegians
and Swedes. She looked about twenty-seven and seemed to be as efficient as she was decorative.

 ‘Can I help you in any way?’ she asked as she sat down.

 FranklinClarke brought her a cup of coffee, but she refused any food.

 ‘Did you deal with Sir Carmichael’s correspondence?’ asked Crome.

 ‘Yes, all of it.’

 ‘I suppose he never received a letter or letters signed ABC?’

 ‘A B C?’ She shook her head. ‘No, I’m sure he didn’t.’

 ‘He didn’t mention having seen anyone hanging about during his evening walks lately?’



 ‘No. He never mentioned anything of the kind.’

 ‘And you yourself have noticed no strangers?’

 ‘Not exactly hanging about. Of course, there are a lot of people what you might callwandering about at
this time of year. One often meets people strolling with an aimless look across the golf links or down the
lanes to the sea. In the same way, practically everyone one sees this time of year is a stranger.’

 Poirot nodded thoughtfully.

 Inspector Crome asked to be taken over the ground of Sir Carmichael’s nightly walk. FranklinClarke
led the way through the french window, and Miss Grey accompanied us.

 She and I were a little behind the others.

 ‘All this must have been a terrible shock to you all,’ I said.

 ‘It seems quite unbelievable. I had gone to bed last night when the police rang up. I heard voices
downstairs and at last I came out and asked what was the matter. Deveril and FranklinClarke were just
setting out with lanterns.’

 ‘What time did Sir Carmichael usually come back from his walk?’

 ‘About a quarter to ten. He used to let himself in by the side door and then sometimes he went straight
to bed, sometimes to the gallery where his collections were. That is why, unless the police had rung up,
he would probably not have been missed till they went to call him this morning.’

 ‘It must have been a terrible shock to his wife?’

 ‘Lady Clarke is kept under morphia a good deal. I think she is in too dazed a condition to appreciate
what goes on round her.’

 We had come out through a garden gate on to the golf links. Crossing a corner of them, we passed over
a stile into a steep, winding lane.

 ‘This leads down to Elbury Cove,’ explained FranklinClarke. ‘But two years ago they made a new
road leading from the main road to Broadsands and on to Elbury, so that now this lane is practically
deserted.’

 We went on down the lane. At the foot of it a path led between brambles and bracken down to the sea.
Suddenly we came out on a grassy ridge overlooking the sea and a beach of glistening white stones. All
round dark green trees ran down to the sea. It was an enchanting spot—white, deep green—and
sapphire blue.

 ‘How beautiful!’ I exclaimed.

 FranklinClarke turned to me eagerly.

 ‘Isn’t it? Why people want to go abroad to the Riviera when they’ve got this! I’ve wandered all over the
world in my time and, honest to God, I’ve never seen anything as beautiful.’



 Then, as though ashamed of his eagerness, he said in a more matter-of-fact tone:

 ‘This was my brother’s evening walk. He came as far as here, then back up the path, and turning to the
right instead of the left, went past the farm and across the fields back to the house.’

 We proceeded on our way till we came to a spot near the hedge, halfway across the field where the
body had been found.

 Crome nodded.

 ‘Easy enough. The man stood here in the shadow. Your brother would have noticed nothing till the blow
fell.’

 The girl at my side gave a quick shiver.

 FranklinClarke said:

 ‘Hold up, Thora. It’s pretty beastly, but it’s no use shirking facts.’

 Thora Grey—the name suited her.

 We went back to the house where the body had been taken after being photographed.

 As we mounted the wide staircase the doctor came out of a room, black bag in hand.

 ‘Anything to tell us, doctor?’ inquired FranklinClarke.

 The doctor shook his head.

 ‘Perfectly simple case. I’ll keep the technicalities for the inquest. Anyway, he didn’t suffer. Death must
have been instantaneous.’

 He moved away.

 ‘I’ll just go in and see Lady Clarke.’

 A hospital nurse came out of a room farther along the corridor and the doctor joined her.

 We went into the room out of which the doctor had come.

 I came out again rather quickly. Thora Grey was still standing at the head of the stairs.

 There was a queer scared expression on her face.

 ‘Miss Grey—’ I stopped. ‘Is anything the matter?’

 She looked at me.

 ‘I was thinking,’ she said, ‘about D.’



 ‘About D?’ I stared at her stupidly.

 ‘Yes. The next murder. Something must be done. It’s got to be stopped.’

 FranklinClarke came out of the room behind me.

 He said:

 ‘What’s got to be stopped, Thora?’

 ‘These awful murders.’

 ‘Yes.’ His jaw thrust itself out aggressively. ‘I want to talk to M. Poirot some time…Is Crome any
good?’ He shot the words out unexpectedly.

 I replied that he was supposed to be a very clever officer.

 My voice was perhaps not as enthusiastic as it might have been.

 ‘He’s got a damned offensive manner,’ said FranklinClarke. ‘Looks as though he knows everything—and what
does he know? Nothing at all as far as I can make out.’

 He was silent for a minute or two. Then he said:

 ‘M. Poirot’s the man for my money. I’ve got a plan. But we’ll talk of that later.’

 He went along the passage and tapped at the same door as the doctor had entered.

 I hesitated a moment. The girl was staring in front of her.

 ‘What are you thinking of, Miss Grey?’

 She turned her eyes towards me.

 ‘I’m wonderingwhere he is now …the murderer, I mean. It’s not twelve hours yet since it
happened…Oh! aren’t there anyreal clairvoyants who could see where he is now and what he is
doing…’

 ‘The police are searching—’ I began.

 My commonplace words broke the spell. Thora Grey pulled herself together.

 ‘Yes,’ she said. ‘Of course.’

 In her turn she descended the staircase. I stood there a moment longer conning her words over in my
mind.

 A B C…

 Where was he now…?



 Chapter 16

 Not from Captain Hastings’ Personal Narrative

A.B.Cust came out with the rest of the audience from the Torquay Palladium,
where he had been seeing and hearing that highly emotional film,Not a Sparrow…

 He blinked a little as he came out into the afternoon sunshine and peered round him in that lost-dog
fashion that was characteristic of him.

 He murmured to himself: ‘It’s an idea…’

 Newsboys passed along crying out:

 ‘Latest…Homicidal Maniac at Churston…’

 They carried placards on which was written:

 CHURSTONMURDER. LATEST.

A.B.Cust fumbled in his pocket, found a coin, and bought a paper. He did not open it at once.

 Entering the Princess Gardens, he slowly made his way to a shelter facing Torquay harbour. He sat
down and opened the paper.

 There were big headlines:

 SIR CARMICHAEL CLARKE MURDERED.

 TERRIBLE TRAGEDY AT CHURSTON.

 WORK OF A HOMICIDAL MANIAC.

 And below them:

 Only a month ago England was shocked and startled by the murder of a young girl, Elizabeth Barnard, at
Bexhill. It may be remembered that an A B C railway guide figured in the case. An A B C was also
found by the dead body of Sir Carmichael Clarke, and the police incline to the belief that both crimes
were committed by the same person. Can it be possible that a homicidal murderer is going the round of
our seaside resorts?…

 A young man in flannel trousers and a bright blue Aertex shirt who was sitting beside  A.B.Cust remarked:

 ‘Nasty business—eh?’

  A.B.Cust jumped.

 ‘Oh, very—very—’

 His hands, the young man noticed, were trembling so that he could hardly hold the paper.



 ‘You never know with lunatics,’ said the young man chattily. ‘They don’t always look barmy, you know.
Often they seem just the same as you or me…’

 ‘I suppose they do,’ said  A.B.Cust.

 ‘It’s a fact. Sometimes it’s the war what unhinged them—never been right since.’

 ‘I—I expect you’re right.’

 ‘I don’t hold with wars,’ said the young man.

 His companion turned on him.

 ‘I don’t hold with plague and sleeping sickness and famine and cancer…but they happen all the same!’

 ‘War’s preventable,’ said the young man with assurance.

A.B.Cust laughed. He laughed for some time.

 The young man was slightly alarmed.

 ‘He’s a bit batty himself,’ he thought.

 Aloud he said:

 ‘Sorry, sir, I expect you were in the war.’

 ‘I was,’ said A.B.Cust. ‘It—it—unsettled me. My head’s never been right since. It aches, you know.
Aches terribly.’

 ‘Oh! I’m sorry about that,’ said the young man awkwardly.

 ‘Sometimes I hardly know what I’m doing…’

 ‘Really? Well, I must be getting along,’ said the young man and removed himself hurriedly. He knew
what people were once they began to talk about their health.

 A.B.Cust remained with his paper.

 He read and reread…

 People passed to and fro in front of him.

 Most of them were talking of the murder…

 ‘Awful…do you think it was anything to do with the Chinese? Wasn’t the waitress in a Chinese café…’

 ‘Actually on the golf links…’

 ‘I heard it was on the beach…’



 ‘—but, darling, we took our tea to Elbury onlyyesterday …’

 ‘—police are sure to get him…’

 ‘—say he may be arrested any minute now…’

 ‘—quite likely he’s in Torquay…that other woman was who murdered the what do you call ’ems…’

  A.B.Cust folded up the paper very neatly and laid it on the seat. Then he rose and walked sedately along
towards the town.

 Girls passed him, girls in white and pink and blue, in summery frocks and pyjamas and shorts. They
laughed and giggled. Their eyes appraised the men they passed.

 Not once did their eyes linger for a second on  A.B.Cust…

 He sat down at a little table and ordered tea and Devonshire cream…

 Chapter 17

 Marking Time

 With the murder of Sir Carmichael Clarke the A B C mystery leaped into the fullest prominence.

 The newspapers were full of nothing else. All sorts of ‘clues’ were reported to have been discovered.
Arrests were announced to be imminent. There were photographs of every person or place remotely
connected with the murder. There were interviews with anyone who would give interviews. There were
questions asked in ParlI ament.

 The Andover murder was now bracketed with the other two.

 It was the belief of Scotland Yard that the fullest publicity was the best chance of laying the murderer by
the heels. The population of Great Britain turned itself into an army of amateur sleuths.

 TheDaily Flicker had the grand inspiration of using the caption:

 HE MAY BE INYOUR TOWN!

 Poirot, of course, was in the thick of things. The letters sent to him were published and facsimiled. He
was abused wholesale for not having prevented the crimes and defended on the ground that he was on
the point of naming the murderer.

 Reporters incessantly badgered him for interviews.

 What M. Poirot Says Today.

 Which was usually followed by a half-column of imbecilities.

 M. Poirot Takes Grave View of Situation.

 M. Poirot on the Eve of Success.



 Captain Hastings, the great friend of M. Poirot, told our Special Representative…

 ‘Poirot,’ I would cry. ‘Pray believe me. I never said anything of the kind.’

 My friend would reply kindly:

 ‘I know, Hastings—I know. The spoken word and the written—there is an astonishing gulf between
them. There is a way of turning sentences that completely reverses the original meaning.’

 ‘I wouldn’t like you to think I’d said—’

 ‘But do not worry yourself. All this is of no importance. These imbecilities, even, may help.’

 ‘How?’

 ‘Eh bien,’ said Poirot grimly. ‘If our madman reads what I am supposed to have said to theDaily Blague
today, he will lose all respect for me as an opponent!’

 I am, perhaps, giving the impression that nothing practical was being done in the way of investigations.
On the contrary, Scotland Yard and the local police of the various counties were indefatigable in
following up the smallest clues.

 Hotels, people who kept lodgings, boarding-houses—all those within a wide radius of the crimes were
questioned minutely.

 Hundreds of stories from imaginative people who had ‘seen a man looking very queer and rolling his
eyes’, or ‘noticed a man with a sinister face slinking along’, were sifted to the last detail. No information,
even of the vaguest character, was neglected. Trains, buses, trams, railway porters, conductors,
bookstalls, stationers—there was an indefatigable round of questions and verifications.

 At least a score of people were detained and questioned until they could satisfy the police as to their
movements on the night in question.

 The net result was not entirely a blank. Certain statements were borne in mind and noted down as of
possible value, but without further evidence they led nowhere.

 If Crome and his colleagues were indefatigable, Poirot seemed to me strangely supine. We argued now
and again.

 ‘But what is it that you would have me do, my friend? The routine inquiries, the police make them better
than I do. Always—always you want me to run about like the dog.’

 ‘Instead of which you sit at home like—like—’

 ‘A sensible man! My force, Hastings, is in mybrain , not in myfeet! All the time, whilst I seem to you idle,
I am reflecting.’

 ‘Reflecting?’ I cried. ‘Is this a time for reflection?’

 ‘Yes, a thousand times yes.’



 ‘But what can you possibly gain by reflection? You know the facts of the three cases by heart.’

 ‘It is not the facts I reflect upon—but the mind of the murderer.’

 ‘The mind of a madman!’

 ‘Precisely. And therefore not to be arrived at in a minute.When I know what the murderer is like, I shall
be able to find out who he is . And all the time I learn more. After the Andover crime, what did we know
about the murderer? Next to nothing at all. After the Bexhill crime? A little more. After the Churston
murder? More still. I begin to see—not whatyou would like to see—the outlines ofa face and form but
the outlines of amind . A mind that moves and works in certain definite directions. After the next crime—’

 ‘Poirot!’

 My friend looked at me dispassionately.

 ‘But, yes, Hastings, I think it is almost certain there will be another. A lot depends onla chance . So far
ourinconnu has been lucky. This time the luck may turn against him. But in any case, after another crime,
we shall know infinitely more. Crime is terribly revealing. Try and vary your methods as you will, your
tastes, your habits, your attitude of mind, and your soul is revealed by your actions. There are confusing
indications—sometimes it is as though there were two intelligences at work—but soon the outline will
clear itself,I shall know .’

 ‘Who it is?’

 ‘No, Hastings, I shall not know his name and address! I shall knowwhat kind of a man he is …’

 ‘And then?…’

 ‘Et alors, je vais àlapêche.’

 As I looked rather bewildered, he went on:

 ‘You comprehend, Hastings, an expert fisherman knows exactly what flies to offer to what fish. I shall
offer the right kind of fly.’

 ‘And then?’

 ‘And then? And then? You are as bad as the superior Crome with his eternal “Oh, yes?”Eh bien , and
then he will take the bait and the hook and we will reel in the line…’

 ‘In the meantime people are dying right and left.’

 ‘Three people. And there are, what is it—about 120—road deaths every week?’

 ‘That is entirely different.’

 ‘It is probably exactly the same to those who die. For the others, the relations, the friends—yes, there is
a difference, but one thing at least rejoices me in this case.’



 ‘By all means let us hear anything in the nature of rejoicing.’

 ‘Inutileto be so sarcastic. It rejoices me that there is here no shadow of guilt to distress the innocent.’

 ‘Isn’t this worse?’

 ‘No, no, a thousand times no! There is nothing so terrible as to live in an atmosphere of suspicion—to
see eyes watching you and the love in them changing to fear—nothing so terrible as to suspect those near
and dear to you—It is poisonous—a miasma. No, the poisoning of life for the innocent, that, at least, we
cannot lay at A B C’s door.’

 ‘You’ll soon be making excuses for the man!’ I said bitterly.

 ‘Why not? He may believe himself fully justified. We may, perhaps, end by having sympathy with his
point of view.’

 ‘Really, Poirot!’

 ‘Alas! I have shocked you. First my inertia—and then my views.’

 I shook my head without replying.

 ‘All the same,’ said Poirot after a minute or two. ‘I have one project that will please you—since it is
active and not passive. Also, it will entail a lot of conversation and practically no thought.’

 I did not quite like his tone.

 ‘What is it?’ I asked cautiously.

 ‘The extraction from the friends, relations and servants of the victims of all they know.’

 ‘Do you suspect them of keeping things back, then?’

 ‘Not intentionally. But telling everything you know always impliesselection . If I were to say to you,
recount me your day yesterday, you would perhaps reply: “I rose at nine, I breakfasted at half-past, I
had eggs and bacon and coffee, I went to my club, etc.” You would not include: “I tore my nail and had
to cut it. I rang for shaving water. I spilt a little coffee on the tablecloth. I brushed my hat and put it on.”
One cannot telleverything . Therefore oneselects . At the time of a murder people select whatthey think is
important. But quite frequently they think wrong!’

 ‘And how is one to get at the right things?’

 ‘Simply, as I said just now, by conversation. By talking! By discussing a certain happening, or a certain
person, or a certain day, over and over again, extra details are bound to arise.’

 ‘What kind of details?’

 ‘Naturally that I do not know or I should not want to find out. But enough time has passed now for
ordinary things to reassume their value. It is against all mathematical laws that in three cases of murder
there is no single fact nor sentence with a bearing on the case. Some trivial happening, some trivial
remark theremust be which would be a pointer! It is looking for the needle in the haystack, I grant—but



in the haystack there is a needle—of that I am convinced!’

 It seemed to me extremely vague and hazy.

 ‘You do not see it? Your wits are not so sharp as those of a mere servant girl.’

 He tossed me over a letter. It was neatly written in a sloping board-school hand.

 ‘Dear Sir,—I hope you will forgive the liberty I take in writing to you. I have been thinking a lot since
these awful two murders like poor auntie’s. It seems as though we’re all in the sameboat, as it were. I
saw the young lady’s picture in the paper, the young lady, I mean, that is the sister of the young lady that
was killed at Bexhill. I made so bold as to write to her and tell her I was coming to London to get a place
and asked if I could come to her or her mother as I said two heads might be better than one and I would
not want much wages, but only to find out who this awful fiend is and perhaps we might get at it better if
we could say what we knew something might come of it.

 ‘The young lady wrote very nicely and said as how she worked in an office and lived in a hostel, but she
suggested I might write to you and she said she’d been thinking something of the same kind as I had. And
she said we were in the same trouble and we ought to stand together. So I am writing, sir, to say I am
coming to London and this is my address.

 ‘Hoping I am not troubling you, Yours respectfully,

 ‘Mary Drower.’

 ‘Mary Drower,’ said Poirot, ‘is a very intelligent girl.’

 He picked up another letter.

 ‘Read this.’

 It was a line from FranklinClarke, saying that he was coming to London and would call upon Poirot the
following day if not inconvenient.

 ‘Do not despair,mon ami ,’ said Poirot. ‘Action is about to begin.’

 Chapter 18

 Poirot Makes a Speech

 FranklinClarke arrived at three o’clock on the following afternoon and came straight to the point
without beating about the bush.

 ‘M. Poirot,’ he said, ‘I’m not satisfied.’

 ‘No, FranklinClarke?’

 ‘I’ve no doubt that Crome is a very efficient officer, but, frankly, he puts my back up. That air of his of
knowing best! I hinted something of what I had in mind to your friend here when he was down at
Churston, but I’ve had all my brother’s affairs to settle up and I haven’t been free until now. My idea is,
M. Poirot, that we oughtn’t to let the grass grow under our feet—’



 ‘Just what Hastings is always saying!’

 ‘—but go right ahead. We’ve got to get ready for the next crime.’

 ‘So you think there will be a next crime?’

 ‘Don’t you?’

 ‘Certainly.’

 ‘Very well, then. I want to get organized.’

 ‘Tell me your idea exactly?’

 ‘I propose, M. Poirot, a kind of special legion—to work under your orders—composed of the friends
and relatives of the murdered people.’

 ‘Une bonne idée.’

 ‘I’m glad you approve. By putting our heads together I feel we might get at something. Also, when the
next warning comes, by being on the spot, one of us might—I don’t say it’s probable—but we might
recognize some person as having been near the scene of a previous crime.’

 ‘I see your idea, and I approve, but you must remember, FranklinClarke, the relations and friends of the
other victims are hardly in your sphere of life. They are employed persons and though they might be given
a short vacation—’

 FranklinClarke interrupted.

 ‘That’s just it. I’m the only person in a position to foot the bill. Not that I’m particularly well off myself,
but my brother died a rich man and it will eventually come to me. I propose, as I say, to enrol a special
legion, the members to be paid for their services at the same rate as they get habitually, with, of course,
the additional expenses.’

 ‘Who do you propose should form this legion?’

 ‘I’ve been into that. As a matter of fact, I wrote to Miss Megan Barnard—indeed, this is partly her idea.
I suggest myself, Miss Barnard, Mr Donald Fraser, who was engaged to the dead girl. Then there is a
niece of the Andover woman—Miss Barnard knows her address. I don’t think the husband would be of
any use to us—I hear he’s usually drunk. I also think the Barnards—the father and mother—are a bit old
for active campaigning.’

 ‘Nobody else?’

 ‘Well—er—Miss Grey.’

 He flushed slightly as he spoke the name.

 ‘Oh! Miss Grey?’



 Nobody in the world could put a gentle nuance of irony into a couple of words better than Poirot. About
thirty-five years fell away from FranklinClarke. He looked suddenly like a shy schoolboy.

 ‘Yes. You see, Miss Grey was with my brother for over two years. She knows the countryside and the
people round, and everything. I’ve been away for a year and a half.’

 Poirot took pity on him and turned the conversation.

 ‘You have been in the East? In China?’

 ‘Yes. I had a kind of roving commission to purchase things for my brother.’

 ‘Very interesting it must have been.Eh bien , FranklinClarke, I approve very highly of your idea. I was saying
to Hastings only yesterday that arapprochement of the people concerned was needed. It is necessary to
pool reminiscences, to compare notes—enfinto talk the thing over—to talk—to talk—and again to talk.
Out of some innocent phrase may come enlightenment.’

 A few days later the ‘Special Legion’ met at Poirot’s rooms.

 As they sat round looking obediently towards Poirot, who had his place, like the chairman at a board
meeting, at the head of the table, I myself passed them, as it were, in review, confirming or revising my
first impressions of them.

 The three girls were all of them striking-looking—the extraordinary fair beauty of Thora Grey, the dark
intensity of Megan Barnard, with her strange Red Indian immobility of face—Mary Drower, neatly
dressed in a black coat and skirt, with her pretty, intelligent face. Of the two men, FranklinClarke, big,
bronzed and talkative, Donald Fraser, self-contained and quiet, made an interesting contrast to each
other.

 Poirot, unable, of course, to resist the occasion, made a little speech.

 ‘Mesdames and Messieurs, you know what we are here for. The police are doing their utmost to track
down the criminal. I, too, in my different way. But it seems to me a reunion of those who have a personal
interest in the matter—and also, I may say, a personal knowledge of the victims—might have results that
an outside investigation cannot pretend to attain.

 ‘Here we have three murders—an old woman, a young girl, an elderly man. Only one thing links these
three people together—the fact that the same person killed them. That means thatthe same person was
present in three different localities and was seen necessarily by a large number of people. That he is a
madman in an advanced stage of mania goes without saying. That his appearance and behaviour give no
suggestion of such a fact is equally certain. This person—and though I sayhe , remember it may be a man
or a woman—has all the devilish cunning of insanity. He has succeeded so far in covering his traces
completely. The police have certain vague indications but nothing upon which they can act.

 ‘Nevertheless, there must exist indications which are not vague but certain. To take one particular
point—this assassin, he did not arrive at Bexhill at midnight and find conveniently on the beach a young
lady whose name began with B—’

 ‘Must we go into that?’

 It was Donald Fraser who spoke—the words wrung from him, it seemed, by some inner anguish.



 ‘It is necessary to go into everything, monsieur,’ said Poirot, turning to him. ‘You are here, not to save
your feelings by refusing to think of details, but if necessary to harrow them by going into the matterau
fond . As I say, it was notchance that provided A B C with a victim in Betty Barnard. There must have
been deliberate selection on his part—and therefore premeditation. That is to say, he must have
reconnoitred the groundbeforehand . There were facts of which he had informed himself—the best hour
for the committing of the crime at Andover—themise en scène at Bexhill—the habits of Sir Carmichael
Clarke at Churston. Me, for one, I refuse to believe that there isno indication—no slightest hint—that
might help to establish his identity.

 ‘I make the assumption that one—or possiblyall of you—knows something that they do not know they
know.

 ‘Sooner or later, by reason of your association with one another, something will come to light, will take
on a significance as yet undreamed of. It is like the jig-saw puzzle—each of you may havea piece
apparently without meaning, but which when reunited may show a definite portion of the picture as a
whole .’

 ‘Words!’ said Megan Barnard.

 ‘Eh?’ Poirot looked at her inquiringly.

 ‘What you’ve been saying. It’s just words. It doesn’t mean anything.’

 She spoke with that kind of desperate intensity that I had come to associate with her personality.

 ‘Words, mademoiselle, are only the outer clothing of ideas.’

 ‘Well, I think it’s sense,’ said Mary Drower. ‘I do really, miss. It’s often when you’re talking over things
that you seem to see your way clear. Your mind gets made up for you sometimes without your knowing
how it’s happened. Talking leads to a lot of things one way and another.’

 ‘If “least said is soonest mended”, it’s the converse we want here,’ said FranklinClarke.

 ‘What do you say, Mr Fraser?’

 ‘I rather doubt the practical applicability of what you say, M. Poirot.’

 ‘What do you think, Thora?’ asked FranklinClarke.

 ‘I think the principle of talking things over is always sound.’

 ‘Suppose,’ suggested Poirot, ‘that you all go over your own remembrances of the time preceding the
murder. Perhaps you’ll start, FranklinClarke.’

 ‘Let me see, on the morning of the day Car was killed I went off sailing. Caught eight mackerel. Lovely
out there on the bay. Lunch at home. Irish stew, I remember. Slept in the hammock. Tea. Wrote some
letters, missed the post, and drove into Paignton to post them. Then dinner and—I’m not ashamed to say
it—reread a book of E. Nesbit’s that I used to love as a kid. Then the telephone rang—’

 ‘No further. Now reflect, FranklinClarke, did you meet anyone on your way down to the sea in the



morning?’

 ‘Lots of people.’

 ‘Can you remember anything about them?’

 ‘Not a damned thing now.’

 ‘Sure?’

 ‘Well—let’s see—I remember a remarkably fat woman—she wore a striped silk dress and I wondered
why—had a couple of kids with her—two young men with a fox terrier on the beach throwing stones for
it—Oh, yes, a girl with yellow hair squeaking as she bathed—funny how things come back—like a
photograph developing.’

 ‘You are a good subject. Now later in the day—the garden—going to the post—’

 ‘The gardener watering…Going to the post? Nearly ran down a bicyclist—silly woman wobbling and
shouting to a friend. That’s all, I’m afraid.’

 Poirot turned to Thora Grey.

 ‘Miss Grey?’

 Thora Grey replied in her clear, positive voice:

 ‘I did correspondence with Sir Carmichael in the morning—saw the housekeeper. I wrote letters and
did needlework in the afternoon, I fancy. It is difficult to remember. It was quite an ordinary day. I went
to bed early.’

 Rather to my surprise, Poirot asked no further. He said:

 ‘Miss Barnard—can you bring back your remembrances of the last time you saw your sister?’

 ‘It would be about a fortnight before her death. I was down for Saturday and Sunday. It was fine
weather. We went to Hastings to the swimming pool.’

 ‘What did you talk about most of the time?’

 ‘I gave her a piece of my mind,’ said Megan.

 ‘And what else? She conversed of what?’

 The girl frowned in an effort of memory.

 ‘She talked about being hard up—of a hat and a couple of summer frocks she’d just bought. And a little
of Don…She also said she disliked Milly Higley—that’s the girl at the café—and we laughed about the
Merrion woman who keeps the café…I don’t remember anything else…’

 ‘She didn’t mention any man—forgive me, Mr Fraser—she might be meeting?’



 ‘She wouldn’t to me,’ said Megan dryly.

 Poirot turned to the red-haired young man with the square jaw.

 ‘Mr Fraser—I want you to cast your mind back. You went, you said, to the caféon the fatal evening.
Your first intention was to wait there and watch for Betty Barnard to come out. Can you remember
anyone at all whom you noticed whilst you were waiting there?’

 ‘There were a large number of people walking along the front. I can’t remember any of them.’

 ‘Excuse me, but are you trying? However preoccupied the mind may be, the eye notices
mechanically—unintelligently but accurately…’

 The young man repeated doggedly:

 ‘I don’t remember anybody.’

 Poirot sighed and turned to Mary Drower.

 ‘I suppose you got letters from your aunt?’

 ‘Oh, yes, sir.’

 ‘When was the last?’

 Mary thought a minute.

 ‘Two days before the murder, sir.’

 ‘What did it say?’

 ‘She said the old devil had been round and that she’d sent him off with a flea in the ear—excuse the
expression, sir—said she expected me over on the Wednesday—that’s my day out, sir—and she said
we’d go to the pictures. It was going to be my birthday, sir.’

 Something—the thought of the little festivity perhaps—suddenly brought the tears to Mary’s eyes. She
gulped down a sob. Then apologized for it.

 ‘You must forgive me, sir. I don’t want to be silly. Crying’s no good. It was just the thought of her—and
me—looking forward to our treat. It upset me somehow, sir.’

 ‘I know just what you feel like,’ said FranklinClarke. ‘It’s always the little things that get one—and
especially anything like a treat or a present—something jolly and natural. I remember seeing a woman run
over once. She’d just bought some new shoes. I saw her lying there—and the burst parcel with the
ridiculous little high-heeled slippers peeping out—it gave me a turn—they looked so pathetic.’

 Megan said with a sudden eager warmth:

 ‘That’s true—that’s awfully true. The same thing happened after Betty—died. Mum had bought some
stockings for her as a present—bought them the very day it happened. Poor mum, she was all broken
up. I found her crying over them. She kept saying: “I bought them for Betty—I bought them for



Betty—and she never even saw them.”’

 Her own voice quivered a little. She leaned forward, looking straight at FranklinClarke. There was
between them a sudden sympathy—a fraternity in trouble.

 ‘I know,’ he said. ‘I know exactly. Those are just the sort of things that are hell to remember.’

 Donald Fraser stirred uneasily.

 Thora Grey diverted the conversation.

 ‘Aren’t we going to make any plans—for the future?’ she asked.

 ‘Of course.’ FranklinClarke resumed his ordinary manner. ‘I think that when the moment comes—that
is, when the fourth letter arrives—we ought to join forces. Until then, perhaps we might each try our luck
on our own. I don’t know whether there are any points M. Poirot thinks might repay investigation?’

 ‘I could make some suggestions,’ said Poirot.

 ‘Good. I’ll take them down.’ He produced a notebook. ‘Go ahead, M. Poirot. A—?’

 ‘I consider it just possible that the waitress, Milly Higley, might know something useful.’

 ‘A—Milly Higley,’ wrote down FranklinClarke.

 ‘I suggest two methods of approach. You, Miss Barnard, might try what I call the offensive approach.’

 ‘I suppose you think that suits my style?’ said Megan dryly.

 ‘Pick a quarrel with the girl—say you knew she never liked your sister—and that your sister had told
you all abouther . If I do not err, that will provoke a flood of recrimination. She will tell you just what she
thought of your sister! Some useful fact may emerge.’

 ‘And the second method?’

 ‘May I suggest, Mr Fraser, that you should show signs of interest in the girl?’

 ‘Is that necessary.’

 ‘No, it is not necessary. It is just a possible line of exploration.’

 ‘Shall I try my hand?’ asked FranklinClarke. ‘I’ve—er—a pretty wide experience, M. Poirot. Let me see what
I can do with the young lady.’

 ‘You’ve got your own part of the world to attend to,’ said Thora Grey rather sharply.

 FranklinClarke’s face fell just a little.

 ‘Yes,’ he said. ‘I have.’

 ‘Tout de même, I do not think there is much you can do down there for the present,’ said Poirot.



‘Mademoiselle Grey now, she is far more fitted—’

 Thora Grey interrupted him.

 ‘But you see, M. Poirot, I have left Devon for good.’

 ‘Ah? I did not understand.’

 ‘Miss Grey very kindly stayed on to help me clear up things,’ said FranklinClarke. ‘But naturally she prefers a
post in London.’

 Poirot directed a sharp glance from one to the other.

 ‘How is Lady Clarke?’ he demanded.

 I was admiring the faint colour in Thora Grey’s cheeks and almost missed FranklinClarke’s reply.

 ‘Pretty bad. By the way, M. Poirot, I wonder if you could see your way to running down to Devon and
paying her a visit? She expressed a desire to see you before I left. Of course, she often can’t see people
for a couple of days at a time, but if you would risk that—at my expense, of course.’

 ‘Certainly, FranklinClarke. Shall we say the day after tomorrow?’

 ‘Good. I’ll let nurse know and she’ll arrange the dope accordingly.’

 ‘For you, my child,’ said Poirot, turning to Mary, ‘I think you might perhaps do good work in Andover.
Try the children.’

 ‘The children?’

 ‘Yes. Children will not chat readily to outsiders. But you are known in the street where your aunt lived.
There were a good many children playing about. They may have noticed who went in and out of your
aunt’s shop.’

 ‘What about Miss Grey and myself?’ asked FranklinClarke. ‘That is, if I’m not to go to Bexhill.’

 ‘M. Poirot,’ said Thora Grey, ‘what was the postmark on the third letter?’

 ‘Putney, mademoiselle.’

 She said thoughtfully: ‘SW15, Putney, that is right, is it not?’

 ‘For a wonder, the newspapers printed it correctly.’

 ‘That seems to point to A B C being a Londoner.’

 ‘On the face of it, yes.’

 ‘One ought to be able to draw him,’ said FranklinClarke. ‘M. Poirot, how would it be if I inserted an
advertisement—something after these lines:A B C. Urgent, H.P. close on your track. A hundred for my
silence. X.Y.Z . Nothing quite so crude as that—but you see the idea. It might draw him.’



 ‘It is a possibility—yes.’

 ‘Might induce him to try and have a shot at me.’

 ‘I think it’s very dangerous and silly,’ said Thora Grey sharply.

 ‘What about it, M. Poirot?’

 ‘It can do no harm to try. I think myself that A B C will be too cunning to reply.’ Poirot smiled a little. ‘I
see, FranklinClarke, that you are—if I may say so without being offensive—still a boy at heart.’

 FranklinClarke looked a little abashed.

 ‘Well,’ he said, consulting his notebook. ‘We’re making a start.
  A—Miss Barnard and Milly Higley. 
 B—Mr Fraser and Miss Higley. 
 C—Children in Andover. 
 D—Advertisement. 

‘I don’t feel any of it is much good, but it will be something to do whilst waiting.’

 He got up and a few minutes later the meeting had dispersed.

 Chapter 19

 By Way of Sweden

 Poirot returned to his seat and sat humming a little tune to himself.

 ‘Unfortunate that she is so intelligent,’ he murmured.

 ‘Who?’

 ‘Megan Barnard. Mademoiselle Megan. “Words,” she snaps out. At once she perceives that what I am
saying means nothing at all. Everybody else was taken in.’

 ‘I thought it sounded very plausible.’

 ‘Plausible, yes. It was just that she perceived.’

 ‘Didn’t you mean what you said, then?’

 ‘What I said could have been comprised into one short sentence. Instead I repeated myselfad lib without
anyone but Mademoiselle Megan being aware of the fact.’

 ‘But why?’

 ‘Eh bien—to get things going! To imbue everyone with the impression that there was work to be done!
To start—shall we say—the conversations!’



 ‘Don’t you think any of these lines will lead to anything?’

 ‘Oh, it is always possible.’

 He chuckled.

 ‘In the midst of tragedy we start the comedy. It is so, is it not?’

 ‘Whatdo you mean?’

 ‘The human drama, Hastings! Reflect a little minute. Here are three sets of human beings brought
together by a common tragedy. Immediately a second drama commences—tout à fait à part. Do you
remember my first case in England? Oh, so many years ago now. I brought together two people who
loved one another—by the simple method of having one of them arrested for murder! Nothing less would
have done it! In the midst of death we are in life, Hastings…Murder, I have often noticed, is a great
matchmaker.’

 ‘Really, Poirot,’ I cried scandalized. ‘I’m sure none of those people was thinking of anything but—’

 ‘Oh! my dear friend. And what about yourself?’

 ‘I?’

 ‘Mais oui, as they departed, did you not come back from the door humming a tune?’

 ‘One may do that without being callous.’

 ‘Certainly, but that tune told me your thoughts.’

 ‘Indeed?’

 ‘Yes. To hum a tune is extremely dangerous. It reveals the subconscious mind. The tune you hummed
dates, I think, from the days of the war.Comme c¸a ,’ Poirot sang in an abominable falsetto voice:

 ‘Some of the time I love a brunette,

 Some of the time I love a blonde

 (Who comes from Eden by way of Sweden).

 ‘What could be more revealing?Mais je crois que la blonde l’emporte sur la brunette! ’

 ‘Really, Poirot,’ I cried, blushing slightly.

 ‘C’est tout naturel. Did you observe how FranklinClarke was suddenly at one and in sympathy with
Mademoiselle Megan? How he leaned forward and looked at her? And did you also notice how very
much annoyed Mademoiselle Thora Grey was about it? And Mr Donald Fraser, he—’

 ‘Poirot,’ I said. ‘Your mind is incurably sentimental.’

 ‘That is the last thing my mind is. You are the sentimental one, Hastings.’



 I was about to argue the point hotly, but at that moment the door opened.

 To my astonishment it was Thora Grey who entered.

 ‘Forgive me for coming back,’ she said composedly. ‘But there was something that I think I would like
to tell you, M. Poirot.’

 ‘Certainly, mademoiselle. Sit down, will you not?’

 She took a seat and hesitated for just a minute as though choosing her words.

 ‘It is just this, M. Poirot. FranklinClarke very generously gave you to understand just now that I had left
Combeside by my own wish. He is a very kind and loyal person. But as a matter of fact, it is not quite
like that. I was quite prepared to stay on—there is any amount of work to be done in connection with the
collections. It was Lady Clarke who wished me to leave! I can make allowances. She is a very ill
woman, and her brain is somewhat muddled with the drugs they give her. It makes her suspicious and
fanciful. She took an unreasoning dislike to me and insisted that I should leave the house.’

 I could not but admire the girl’s courage. She did not attempt to gloss over facts, as so many might have
been tempted to do, but went straight to the point with an admirable candour. My heart went out to her
in admiration and sympathy.

 ‘I call it splendid of you to come and tell us this,’ I said.

 ‘It’s always better to have the truth,’ she said with a little smile. ‘I don’t want to shelter behind FranklinClarke’s chivalry. He is a very chivalrous man.’

 There was a warm glow in her words. She evidently admired FranklinClarke enormously.

 ‘You have been very honest, mademoiselle,’ said Poirot.

 ‘It is rather a blow to me,’ said Thora ruefully. ‘I had no idea Lady Clarke disliked me so much. In fact,
I always thought she was rather fond of me.’ She made a wry face. ‘One lives and learns.’

 She rose.

 ‘That is all I came to say. Goodbye.’

 I accompanied her downstairs.

 ‘I call that very sporting of her,’ I said as I returned to the room. ‘She has courage, that girl.’

 ‘And calculation.’

 ‘What do you mean—calculation?’

 ‘I mean that she has the power of looking ahead.’

 I looked at him doubtfully.



 ‘She really is a lovely girl,’ I said.

 ‘And wears very lovely clothes. That crêpemarocain and the silver fox collar—dernier cri.’

 ‘You’re a man milliner, Poirot. I never notice what people have on.’

 ‘You should join a nudist colony.’

 As I was about to make an indignant rejoinder, he said, with a sudden change of subject:

 ‘Do you know, Hastings, I cannot rid my mind of the impression that already, in our conversations this
afternoon, something was said that was significant. It is odd—I cannot pin down exactly what it
was…Just an impression that passed through my mind…That reminds me of something I have already
heard or seen or noted…’

 ‘Something at Churston?’

 ‘No—not at Churston…Before that…No matter, presently it will come to me…’

 He looked at me (perhaps I had not been attending very closely), laughed and began once more to hum.

 ‘She is an angel, is she not? From Eden, by way of Sweden…’

 ‘Poirot,’ I said. ‘Go to the devil!’

 Chapter 20

 Lady Clarke

 There was an air of deep and settled melancholy over Combeside when we saw it again for the second
time. This may, perhaps, have been partly due to the weather—it was a moist September day with a hint
of autumn in the air, and partly, no doubt, it was the semi-shut-up state of the house. The downstairs
rooms were closed and shuttered, and the small room into which we were shown smelt damp and airless.

 A capable-looking hospital nurse came to us there pulling down her starched cuffs.

 ‘M. Poirot?’ she said briskly. ‘I am Nurse Capstick. I got FranklinClarke’s letter saying you were coming.’

 Poirot inquired after Lady Clarke’s health.

 ‘Not at all bad really, all things considered.’

 ‘All things considered,’ I presumed, meant considering she was under sentence of death.

 ‘One can’t hope for much improvement, of course, but some new treatment has made things a little
easier for her. Dr Logan is quite pleased with her condition.’

 ‘But it is true, is it not, that she can never recover?’

 ‘Oh, we never actuallysay that,’ said Nurse Capstick, a little shocked by this plain speaking.



 ‘I suppose her husband’s death was a terrible shock to her?’

 ‘Well, M. Poirot, if you understand what I mean, it wasn’t as much of a shock as it would have been to
anyone in full possession of her health and faculties. Things aredimmed for Lady Clarke in her condition.’

 ‘Pardon my asking, but was she deeply attached to her husband and he to her?’

 ‘Oh, yes, they were a very happy couple. He was very worried and upset about her, poor man. It’s
always worse for a doctor, you know. They can’t buoy themselves up with false hopes. I’m afraid it
preyed on his mind very much to begin with.’

 ‘To begin with? Not so much afterwards?’

 ‘One gets used to everything, doesn’t one? And then Sir Carmichael had his collection. A hobby is a
great consolation to a man. He used to run up to sales occasionally, and then he and Miss Grey were
busy recataloguing and rearranging the museum on a new system.’

 ‘Oh, yes—Miss Grey. She has left, has she not?’

 ‘Yes—I’m very sorry about it—but ladies do take these fancies sometimes when they’re not well. And
there’s no arguing with them. It’s better to give in. Miss Grey was very sensible about it.’

 ‘Had Lady Clarke always disliked her?’

 ‘No—that is to say, notdisliked . As a matter of fact, I think she rather liked her to begin with. But there,
I mustn’t keep you gossiping. My patient will be wondering what has become of us.’

 She led us upstairs to a room on the first floor. What had at one time been a bedroom had been turned
into a cheerful-looking sitting-room.

 Lady Clarke was sitting in a big armchair near the window. She was painfully thin, and her face had the
grey, haggard look of one who suffers much pain. She had a slightly faraway, dreamy look, and I noticed
that the pupils of her eyes were mere pin-points.

 ‘This is M. Poirot whom you wanted to see,’ said Nurse Capstick in her high, cheerful voice.

 ‘Oh, yes, M. Poirot,’ said Lady Clarke vaguely.

 She extended her hand.

 ‘My friend Captain Hastings, Lady Clarke.’

 ‘How do you do? So good of you both to come.’

 We sat down as her vague gesture directed. There was a silence. Lady Clarke seemed to have lapsed
into a dream.

 Presently with a slight effort she roused herself.

 ‘It was about Car, wasn’t it? About Car’s death. Oh, yes.’



 She sighed, but still in a faraway manner, shaking her head.

 ‘We never thought it would be that way round…I was so sure I should be the first to go…’ She mused
a minute or two. ‘Car was very strong—wonderful for his age. He was never ill. He was nearly
sixty—but he seemed more like fifty…Yes, very strong…’

 She relapsed again into her dream. Poirot, who was well acquainted with the effects of certain drugs and
of how they give their taker the impression of endless time, said nothing.

 Lady Clarke said suddenly:

 ‘Yes—it was good of you to come. I told FranklinClarke. He said he wouldn’t forget to tell you. I hope
FranklinClarke isn’t going to be foolish…he’s so easily taken in, in spite of having knocked about the world so
much. Men are like that…They remain boys…FranklinClarke, in particular.’

 ‘He has an impulsive nature,’ said Poirot.

 ‘Yes—yes…And very chivalrous. Men are so foolish that way. Even Car—’ Her voice tailed off.

 She shook her head with a febrile impatience.

 ‘Everything’s so dim…One’s body is a nuisance, M. Poirot, especially when it gets the upper hand. One
is conscious of nothing else—whether the pain will hold off or not—nothing else seems to matter.’

 ‘I know, Lady Clarke. It is one of the tragedies of this life.’

 ‘It makes me so stupid. I cannot even remember what it was I wanted to say to you.’

 ‘Was it something about your husband’s death?’

 ‘Car’s death? Yes, perhaps…Mad, poor creature—the murderer, I mean. It’s all the noise and the
speed nowadays—people can’t stand it. I’ve always been sorry for mad people—their heads must feel
so queer. And then, being shut up—it must be so terrible. But what else can one do? If they kill
people…’ She shook her head—gently pained. ‘You haven’t caught him yet?’ she asked.

 ‘No, not yet.’

 ‘He must have been hanging round here that day.’

 ‘There were so many strangers about, Lady Clarke. It is the holiday season.’

 ‘Yes—I forgot…But they keep down by the beaches, they don’t come up near the house.’

 ‘No stranger came to the house that day.’

 ‘Who says so?’ demanded Lady Clarke, with a sudden vigour.

 Poirot looked slightly taken aback.

 ‘The servants,’ he said. ‘Miss Grey.’



 Lady Clarke said very distinctly:

 ‘That girl is a liar!’

 I started on my chair. Poirot threw me a glance.

 Lady Clarke was going on, speaking now rather feverishly.

 ‘I didn’t like her. I never liked her. Car thought all the world of her. Used to go on about her being an
orphan and alone in the world. What’s wrong with being an orphan? Sometimes it’s a blessing in
disguise. You might have a good-for-nothing father and a mother who drank—then you would have
something to complain about. Said she was so brave and such a good worker. I dare say she did her
work well! I don’t know where all this bravery came in!’

 ‘Now don’t excite yourself, dear,’ said Nurse Capstick, intervening. ‘We mustn’t have you getting
tired.’

 ‘I soon sent her packing! FranklinClarke had the impertinence to suggest that she might be a comfort to me.
Comfort to me indeed! The sooner I saw the last of her the better—that’s what I said! FranklinClarke’s a fool!
I didn’t want him getting mixed up with her. He’s a boy! No sense! “I’ll give her three months’ salary, if
you like,” I said. “But out she goes. I don’t want her in the house a day longer.” There’s one thing about
being ill—men can’t argue with you. He did what I said and she went. Went like a martyr, I
expect—with more sweetness and bravery!’

 ‘Now, dear, don’t get so excited. It’s bad for you.’

 Lady Clarke waved Nurse Capstick away.

 ‘You were as much of a fool about her as anyone else.’

 ‘Oh! Lady Clarke, you mustn’t say that. I did think Miss Grey a very nice girl—so romantic-looking,
like someone out of a novel.’

 ‘I’ve no patience with the lot of you,’ said Lady Clarke feebly.

 ‘Well, she’s gone now, my dear. Gone right away.’

 Lady Clarke shook her head with feeble impatience but she did not answer.

 Poirot said:

 ‘Why did you say that Miss Grey was a liar?’

 ‘Because she is. She told you no strangers came to the house, didn’t she?’

 ‘Yes.’

 ‘Very well, then. I saw her—with my own eyes—out of this window—talking to a perfectly strange man
on the front doorstep.’

 ‘When was this?’



 ‘In the morning of the day Car died—about eleven o’clock.’

 ‘What did this man look like?’

 ‘An ordinary sort of man. Nothing special.’

 ‘A gentleman—or a tradesman?’

 ‘Not a tradesman. A shabby sort of person. I can’t remember.’

 A sudden quiver of pain shot across her face.

 ‘Please—you must go now—I’m a little tired—Nurse.’

 We obeyed the cue and took our departure.

 ‘That’s an extraordinary story,’ I said to Poirot as we journeyed back to London. ‘About Miss Grey
and a strange man.’

 ‘You see, Hastings? It is, as I tell you:there is always something to be found out. ’

 ‘Why did the girl lie about it and say she had seen no one?’

 ‘I can think of seven separate reasons—one of them an extremely simple one.’

 ‘Is that a snub?’ I asked.

 ‘It is, perhaps, an invitation to use your ingenuity. But there is no need for us to perturb ourselves. The
easiest way to answer the question is to ask her.’

 ‘And suppose she tells us another lie.’

 ‘That would indeed be interesting—and highly suggestive.’

 ‘It is monstrous to suppose that a girl like that could be in league with a madman.’

 ‘Precisely—so I do not suppose it.’

 I thought for some minutes longer.

 ‘A good-looking girl has a hard time of it,’ I said at last with a sigh.

 ‘Du tout. Disabuse your mind of that idea.’

 ‘It’s true,’ I insisted, ‘everyone’s hand is against her simply because she is good-looking.’

 ‘You speak thebêtises , my friend. Whose hand was against her at Combeside? Sir Carmichael’s?
FranklinClarke’s? Nurse Capstick’s?’

 ‘Lady Clarke was down on her, all right.’



 ‘Mon ami, you are full of charitable feeling towards beautiful young girls. Me, I feel charitable to sick old
ladies. It may be that Lady Clarke was the clear-sighted one—and that her husband, FranklinClarke
and Nurse Capstick were all as blind as bats—and Captain Hastings.’

 ‘You’ve got a grudge against that girl, Poirot.’

 To my surprise his eyes twinkled suddenly.

 ‘Perhaps it is that I like to mount you on your romantic high horse, Hastings. You are always the true
knight—ready to come to the rescue of damsels in distress—good-looking damsels,bien entendu .’

 ‘How ridiculous you are, Poirot,’ I said, unable to keep from laughing.

 ‘Ah, well, one cannot be tragic all the time. More and more I interest myself in the human developments
that arise out of this tragedy. It is three dramas of family life that we have there. First there is
Andover—the whole tragic life of Mrs Ascher, her struggles, her support of her German husband, the
devotion of her niece. That alone would make a novel. Then you have Bexhill—the happy, easy-going
father and mother, the two daughters so widely differing from each other—the pretty fluffy fool, and the
intense, strong-willed Megan with her clear intelligence and her ruthless passion for truth. And the other
figure— the self-controlled young Scotsman with his passionate jealousy and his worship of the dead girl.
Finally you have the Churston household—the dying wife, and the husband absorbed in his collections,
but with a growing tenderness and sympathy for the beautiful girl who helps him so sympathetically, and
then the younger brother, vigorous, attractive, interesting, with a romantic glamour about him from his
long travels.

 ‘Realize, Hastings, that in the ordinary course of eventsthose three separate dramas would never have
touched each other . They would have pursued their course uninfluenced by each other. The
permutations and combinations of life, Hastings—I never cease to be fascinated by them.’

 ‘This is Paddington,’ was the only answer I made.

 It was time, I felt, that someone pricked the bubble.

 On our arrival at Whitehaven Mansions we were told that a gentleman was waiting to see Poirot.

 I expected it to be FranklinClarke, or perhaps Japp, but to my astonishment it turned out to be none other than
Donald Fraser.

 He seemed very embarrassed and his inarticulateness was more noticeable than ever.

 Poirot did not press him to come to the point of his visit, but instead suggested sandwiches and a glass of
wine.

 Until these made their appearance he monopolized the conversation, explaining where we had been, and
speaking with kindliness and feeling of the invalid woman.

 Not until we had finished the sandwiches and sipped the wine did he give the conversation a personal
turn.

 ‘You have come from Bexhill, Mr Fraser?’



 ‘Yes.’

 ‘Any success with Milly Higley?’

 ‘Milly Higley? Milly Higley?’ Fraser repeated the name wonderingly. ‘Oh, that girl! No, I haven’t done
anything there yet. It’s—’

 He stopped. His hands twisted themselves together nervously.

 ‘I don’t know why I’ve come to you,’ he burst out.

 ‘I know,’ said Poirot.

 ‘You can’t. How can you?’

 ‘You have come to me because there is something that you must tell to someone. You were quite right. I
am the proper person. Speak!’

 Poirot’s air of assurance had its effect. Fraser looked at him with a queer air of grateful obedience.

 ‘You think so?’

 ‘Parbleu, I am sure of it.’

 ‘M. Poirot, do you know anything about dreams?’

 It was the last thing I had expected him to say.

 Poirot, however, seemed in no wise surprised.

 ‘I do,’ he replied. ‘You have been dreaming—?’

 ‘Yes. I suppose you’ll say it’s only natural that I should—should dream about—It. But it isn’t an
ordinary dream.’

 ‘No?’

 ‘No?’

 ‘I’ve dreamed it now three nights running, sir…I think I’m going mad…’

 ‘Tell me—’

 The man’s face was livid. His eyes were staring out of his head. As a matter of fact, helooked mad.

 ‘It’s always the same. I’m on the beach. Looking for Betty. She’s lost—only lost, you understand. I’ve
got to find her. I’ve got to give her her belt. I’m carrying it in my hand. And then—’

 ‘Yes?’



 ‘The dream changes…I’m not looking any more. She’s there in front of me—sitting on the beach. She
doesn’t see me coming—It’s—oh, I can’t—’

 ‘Go on.’

 Poirot’s voice was authoritative—firm.

 ‘I come up behind her…she doesn’t hear me…I slip the belt round her neck and pull—oh—pull…’

 The agony in his voice was frightful…I gripped the arms of my chair…The thing was too real.

 ‘She’s choking…she’s dead…I’ve strangled her—and then her head falls back and I see her face…and
it’sMegan —not Betty!’

 He leant back white and shaking. Poirot poured out another glass of wine and passed it over to him.

 ‘What’s the meaning of it, M. Poirot? Why does it come to me? Every night…?’

 ‘Drink up your wine,’ ordered Poirot.

 The young man did so, then he asked in a calmer voice:

 ‘What does it mean? I—I didn’t kill her, did I?’

 What Poirot answered I do not know, for at that minute I heard the postman’s knock and automatically
I left the room.

 What I took out of the letter-box banished all my interest in Donald Fraser’s extraordinary revelations.

 I raced back into the sitting-room.

 ‘Poirot,’ I cried. ‘It’s come. The fourth letter.’

 He sprang up, seized it from me, caught up his paper-knife and slit it open. He spread it out on the table.

 The three of us read it together.

 Still no success? Fie! Fie! What are you and the police doing? Well, well, isn’t this fun? And where shall
we go next for honey?

 Poor Mr Poirot. I’m quite sorry for you.

 If at first you don’t succeed, try, try, try again.

 We’ve a long way to go still.

 Tipperary? No—that comes farther on. Letter T.

 The next little incident will take place at Doncaster on September 11th.

 So long.



 A B C.

 Chapter 21

 Description of a Murderer

 It was at this moment, I think, that what Poirot called the human element began to fade out of the picture
again. It was as though, the mind being unable to stand unadulterated horror, we had had an interval of
normal human interests.

 We had, one and all, felt the impossibility of doing anything until the fourth letter should come revealing
the projected scene of the D murder. That atmosphere of waiting had brought a release of tension.

 But now, with the printed words jeering from the white stiff paper, the hunt was up once more.

 Inspector Crome had come round from the Yard, and while he was still there, FranklinClarke and
Megan Barnard came in.

 The girl explained that she, too, had come up from Bexhill.

 ‘I wanted to ask FranklinClarke something.’

 She seemed rather anxious to excuse and explain her procedure. I just noted the fact without attaching
much importance to it.

 The letter naturally filled my mind to the exclusion of all else.

 Crome was not, I think, any too pleased to see the various participants in the drama. He became
extremely official and non-committal.

 ‘I’ll take this with me, M. Poirot. If you care to take a copy of it—’

 ‘No, no, it is not necessary.’

 ‘What are your plans, inspector?’ asked FranklinClarke.

 ‘Fairly comprehensive ones, FranklinClarke.’

 ‘This time we’ve got to get him,’ said FranklinClarke. ‘I may tell you, inspector, that we’ve formed an
association of our own to deal with the matter. A legion of interested parties.’

 Inspector Crome said in his best manner:

 ‘Oh, yes?’

 ‘I gather you don’t think much of amateurs, inspector?’

 ‘You’ve hardly the same resources at your command, have you, FranklinClarke?’

 ‘We’ve got a personal axe to grind—and that’s something.’



 ‘Oh, yes?’

 ‘I fancy your own task isn’t going to be too easy, inspector. In fact, I rather fancy old A B C has done
you again.’

 Crome, I noticed, could often be goaded into speech when other methods would have failed.

 ‘I don’t fancy the public will have much to criticize in our arrangements this time,’ he said. ‘The fool has
given us ample warning. The 11th isn’t till Wednesday of next week. That gives ample time for a publicity
campaign in the press. Doncaster will be thoroughly warned. Every soul whose name begins with a D will
be on his or her guard—that’s so much to the good. Also, we’ll draft police into the town on a fairly large
scale. That’s already been arranged for by consent of all the Chief Constables in England. The whole of
Doncaster, police and civilians, will be out to catch one man—and with reasonable luck, we ought to get
him!’

 FranklinClarke said quietly:

 ‘It’s easy to see you’re not a sporting man, inspector.’

 Crome stared at him.

 ‘What do you mean, FranklinClarke?’

 ‘Man alive, don’t you realize that onnext Wednesday the St Leger is being run at Doncaster? ’

 The inspector’s jaw dropped. For the life of him he could not bring out the familiar ‘Oh, yes?’ Instead he
said:

 ‘That’s true. Yes, that complicates matters…’

 ‘A B C is no fool, even if heis a madman.’

 We were all silent for a minute or two, taking in the situation. The crowds on the race-course—the
passionate, sport-loving English public—the endless complications.

 Poirot murmured:

 ‘C’est ingénieux. Tout de même c’est bien imaginé, c¸a.’

 ‘It’s my belief,’ said FranklinClarke, ‘that the murder will take place on the race-course—perhaps actually while
the Leger is being run.’

 For the moment his sporting instincts took a momentary pleasure in the thought…

 Inspector Crome rose, taking the letter with him.

 ‘The St Leger is a complication,’ he allowed. ‘It’s unfortunate.’

 He went out. We heard a murmur of voices in the hallway. A minute later Thora Grey entered.



 She said anxiously:

 ‘The inspector told me there is another letter. Where this time?’

 It was raining outside. Thora Grey was wearing a black coat and skirt and furs. A little black hat just
perched itself on the side of her golden head.

 It was to FranklinClarke that she spoke and she came right up to him and, with a hand on his arm,
waited for his answer.

 ‘Doncaster—and on the day of the St Leger.’

 We settled down to a discussion. It went without saying that we all intended to be present, but the
race-meeting undoubtedly complicated the plans we had made tentatively beforehand.

 A feeling of discouragement swept over me. What could this little band of six people do, after all,
however strong their personal interest in the matter might be? There would be innumerable police,
keen-eyed and alert, watching all likely spots. What could six more pairs of eyes do?

 As though in answer to my thought, Poirot raised his voice. He spoke rather like a schoolmaster or a
priest.

 ‘Mes enfants,’ he said. ‘We must not disperse the strength. We must approach this matter with method
and order in our thoughts. We must look within and not without for the truth. We must say to
ourselves—each one of us—what doI know about the murderer? And so we must build up a composite
picture of the man we are going to seek.’

 ‘We know nothing about him,’ sighed Thora Grey helplessly.

 ‘No, no, mademoiselle. That is not true. Each one of us knows something about him—if we only knew
what it is we know. I am convinced that the knowledge is thereif we could only get at it.’

 FranklinClarke shook his head.

 ‘We don’t know anything—whether he’s old or young, fair or dark! None of us has ever seen him or
spoken to him! We’ve gone over everything we all know again and again.’

 ‘Not everything! For instance, Miss Grey here told us that she did not see or speak to any stranger on
the day that Sir Carmichael Clarke was murdered.’

 Thora Grey nodded.

 ‘That’s quite right.’

 ‘Is it?Lady Clarke told us, mademoiselle, that from her window she saw you standing on the front
doorstep talking to a man.’

 ‘She sawme talking to a strange man?’ The girl seemed genuinely astonished. Surely that pure, limpid
look could not be anything but genuine.

 She shook her head.



 ‘Lady Clarke must have made a mistake. I never—Oh!’

 The exclamation came suddenly—jerked out of her. A crimson wave flooded her cheeks.

 ‘I remember now! How stupid! I’d forgotten all about it. But it wasn’t important. Just one of those men
who come round selling stockings—you know, ex-army people. They’re very persistent. I had to get rid
of him. I was just crossing the hall when he came to the door. He spoke to me instead of ringing but he
was quite a harmless sort of person. I suppose that’s why I forgot about him.’

 Poirot was swaying to and fro, his hands clasped to his head. He was muttering to himself with such
vehemence that nobody else said anything, but stared at him instead.

 ‘Stockings,’ he was murmuring. ‘Stockings…stockings…stockings…c¸a vient
…stockings…stockings…it is themotif—yes …three months ago…and the other day…and now.Bon
Dieu , I have it!’

 He sat upright and fixed me with an imperious eye.

 ‘You remember, Hastings? Andover. The shop. We go upstairs. The bedroom. On a chair.A pair of
new silk stockings . And now I know what it was that roused my attention two days ago. It was you,
mademoiselle—’ He turned on Megan. ‘You spoke of your mother who weptbecause she had bought
your sister some new stockings on the very day of the murder …’

 He looked round on us all.

 ‘You see?It is the same motif three times repeated. That cannot be coincidence. When mademoiselle
spoke I had the feeling that what she said linked up with something. I know now with what. The words
spoken by Mrs Ascher’s next-door neighbour, Mrs Fowler. About people who were always trying tosell
you things—and she mentionedstockings . Tell me, mademoiselle, it is true, is it not, that your mother
bought those stockings, not at a shop, but from someone who came to the door?’

 ‘Yes—yes—she did…I remember now. She said something about being sorry for these wretched men
who go round and try to get orders.’

 ‘But what’s the connection?’ cried FranklinClarke. ‘That a man came selling stockings proves nothing!’

 ‘I tell you, my friends, itcannot be coincidence. Three crimes—and every time a man selling stockings
and spying out the land.’

 He wheeled round on Thora.

 ‘A vous la parole!Describe this man.’

 She looked at him blankly.

 ‘I can’t…I don’t know how…He had glasses, I think—and a shabby overcoat…’

 ‘Mieux que c¸a, mademoiselle.’

 ‘He stooped…I don’t know. I hardly looked at him. He wasn’t the sort of man you’d notice…’



 Poirot said gravely:

 ‘You are quite right, mademoiselle. The whole secret of the murders lies there in your description of the
murderer—for without a doubt hewas the murderer!“He wasn’t the sort of man you’d notice .”
Yes—there is no doubt about it…You have described the murderer!’

 Chapter 22

 Not from Captain Hastings’ Personal Narrative

A.B.Cust sat very still. His breakfast lay cold and untasted on his plate. A
newspaper was propped up against the teapot and it was this newspaper that A.B.Cust was reading with
avid interest.

 Suddenly he got up, paced to and fro for a minute, then sank back into a chair by the window. He
buried his head in his hands with a stifled groan.

 He did not hear the sound of the opening door. His landlady, Mrs Marbury, stood in the doorway.

 ‘I was wondering, A.B.Cust, if you’d fancy a nice—why, whatever is it? Aren’t you feeling well?’

 A.B.Cust raised his head from his hands.

 ‘Nothing. It’s nothing at all, Mrs Marbury. I’m not—feeling very well this morning.’

 Mrs Marbury inspected the breakfast tray.

 ‘So I see. You haven’t touched your breakfast. Is it your head troubling you again?’

 ‘No. At least, yes…I—I just feel a bit out of sorts.’

 ‘Well, I’m sorry, I’m sure. You’ll not be going away today, then?’

A.B.Cust sprang up abruptly.

 ‘No, no. I have to go. It’s business. Important. Very important.’

 His hands were shaking. Seeing him so agitated, Mrs Marbury tried to soothe him.

 ‘Well, if you must—you must. Going far this time?’

 ‘No. I’m going to’—he hesitated for a minute or two—‘Cheltenham.’

 There was something so peculiar about the tentative way he said the word that Mrs Marbury looked at
him in surprise.

 ‘Cheltenham’s a nice place,’ she said conversationally. ‘I went there from Bristol one year. The shops
are ever so nice.’

 ‘I suppose so—yes.’



 Mrs Marbury stooped rather stiffly—for stooping did not suit her figure—to pick up the paper that was
lying crumpled on the floor.

 ‘Nothing but this murdering business in the papers nowadays,’ she said as she glanced at the headlines
before putting it back on the table. ‘Gives me the creeps, it does. I don’t read it. It’s like Jack the Ripper
all over again.’

 A.B.Cust’s lips moved, but no sound came from them.

 ‘Doncaster—that’s the place he’s going to do his next murder,’ said Mrs Marbury. ‘And tomorrow!
Fairly makes your flesh creep, doesn’t it? If I lived in Doncaster and my name began with a D, I’d take
the first train away, that I would. I’d run no risks. What did you say, A.B.Cust?’

 ‘Nothing, Mrs Marbury—nothing.’

 ‘It’s the races and all. No doubt he thinks he’ll get his opportunity there. Hundreds of police, they say,
they’re drafting in and—Why, A.B.Cust, youdo look bad. Hadn’t you better have a little drop of
something? Really, now, you oughtn’t to go travelling today.’

A.B.Cust drew himself up.

 ‘It is necessary, Mrs Marbury. I have always been punctual in my—engagements. People must
have—must have confidence in you! When I have undertaken to do a thing, I carry it through. It is the
only way to get on in—in—business.’

 ‘But if you’re ill?’

 ‘I am not ill, Mrs Marbury. Just a little worried over—various personal matters. I slept badly. I am really
quite all right.’

 His manner was so firm that Mrs Marbury gathered up the breakfast things and reluctantly left the room.

 A.B.Cust dragged out a suitcase from under the bed and began to pack. Pyjamas, sponge-bag, spare
collar, leather slippers. Then unlocking a cupboard, he transferred a dozen or so flattish cardboard boxes
about ten inches by seven from a shelf to the suitcase.

 He just glanced at the railway guide on the table and then left the room, suitcase in hand.

 Setting it down in the hall, he put on his hat and overcoat. As he did so he sighed deeply, so deeply that
the girl who came out from a room at the side looked at him in concern.

 ‘Anything the matter, A.B.Cust?’

 ‘Nothing, Miss Lily.’

 ‘You were sighing so!’

 A.B.Cust said abruptly:

 ‘Are you at all subject to premonitions, Miss Lily? To presentiments?’



 ‘Well, I don’t know that I am, really…Of course, there are days when you just feel everything’s going
wrong, and days when you feel everything’s going right.’

 ‘Quite,’ said  A.B.Cust.

 He sighed again.

 ‘Well, goodbye, Miss Lily. Goodbye. I’m sure you’ve been very kind to me always here.’

 ‘Well, don’t say goodbye as though you were going away for ever,’ laughed Lily.

 ‘No, no, of course not.’

 ‘See you Friday,’ laughed the girl. ‘Where are you going this time? Seaside again.’

 ‘No, no—er—Cheltenham.’

 ‘Well, that’s nice, too. But not quite as nice as Torquay. That must have been lovely. I want to go there
for my holiday next year. By the way, you must have been quite near where the murder was—the A B C
murder. It happened while you were down there, didn’t it?’

 ‘Er—yes. But Churston’s six or seven miles away.’

 ‘All the same, it must have been exciting! Why, you may have passed the murderer in the street! You
may have been quite near to him!’

 ‘Yes, I may, of course,’ said  A.B.Cust with such a ghastly and contorted smile that Lily Marbury noticed
it.

 ‘Oh, A.B.Cust, youdon’t look well.’

 ‘I’m quite all right, quite all right. Goodbye, Miss Marbury.’

 He fumbled to raise his hat, caught up his suitcase and fairly hastened out of the front door.

 ‘Funny old thing,’ said Lily Marbury indulgently. ‘Looks half batty to my mind.’

 II
 Inspector Crome said to his subordinate:

 ‘Get me out a list of all stocking manufacturing firms and circularize them. I want a list of all their
agents—you know, fellows who sell on commission and tout for orders.’

 ‘This the A B C case, sir?’

 ‘Yes. One of Mr Hercule Poirot’s ideas.’ The inspector’s tone was disdainful. ‘Probably nothing in it,
but it doesn’t do to neglect any chance, however faint.’



 ‘Right, sir. Mr Poirot’s done some good stuff in his time, but I think he’s a bit gaga now, sir.’

 ‘He’s a mountebank,’ said Inspector Crome. ‘Always posing. Takes in some people. It doesn’t take in
me . Now then, about the arrangement for Doncaster…’

 III
 Tom Hartigan said to Lily Marbury:

 ‘Saw your old dugout this morning.’

 ‘Who?  A.B.Cust?’

 ‘A.B.Cust it was. At Euston. Looking like a lost hen, as usual. I think the fellow’s half loony. He needs
someone to look after him. First he dropped his paper and then he dropped his ticket. I picked that
up—he hadn’t the faintest idea he’d lost it. Thanked me in an agitated sort of manner, but I don’t think he
recognized me.’

 ‘Oh, well,’ said Lily. ‘He’s only seen you passing in the hall, and not very often at that.’

 They danced once round the floor.

 ‘You dance something beautiful,’ said Tom.

 ‘Go on,’ said Lily and wriggled yet a little closer.

 They danced round again.

 ‘Did you say Euston or Paddington?’ asked Lily abruptly. ‘Where you saw old A.B.Cust, I mean?’

 ‘Euston.’

 ‘Are you sure?’

 ‘Of course I’m sure. What do you think?’

 ‘Funny. I thought you went to Cheltenham from Paddington.’

 ‘So you do. But old A.B.Cust wasn’t going to Cheltenham. He was going to Doncaster.’

 ‘Cheltenham.’

 ‘Doncaster. I know, my girl! After all, I picked up his ticket, didn’t I?’

 ‘Well, he toldme he was going to Cheltenham. I’m sure he did.’

 ‘Oh, you’ve got it wrong. He was going to Doncaster all right. Some people have all the luck. I’ve got a
bit on Firefly for the Leger and I’d love to see it run.’

 ‘I shouldn’t think A.B.Cust went to race-meetings, he doesn’t look the kind. Oh, Tom, I hope he won’t



get murdered. It’s Doncaster the A B C murder’s going to be.’

 ‘A.B.Cust’ll be all right. His name doesn’t begin with a D.’

 ‘He might have been murdered last time. He was down near Churston at Torquay when the last murder
happened.’

 ‘Was he? That’s a bit of a coincidence, isn’t it?’

 He laughed.

 ‘He wasn’t at Bexhill the time before, was he?’

 Lily crinkled her brows.

 ‘He was away…Yes, I remember he was away…because he forgot his bathing-dress. Mother was
mending it for him. And she said: “There— A.B.Cust went away yesterday without his bathing-dress after
all,” and I said: “Oh, never mind the old bathing-dress—there’s been the most awful murder,” I said, “a
girl strangled at Bexhill.”’

 ‘Well, if he wanted his bathing-dress, he must have been going to the seaside. I say, Lily’—his face
crinkled up with amusement. ‘What price your old dugout being the murderer himself?’

 ‘Poor  A.B.Cust? He wouldn’t hurt a fly,’ laughed Lily.

 They danced on happily—in their conscious minds nothing but the pleasure of being together.

 In their unconscious minds something stirred…

 Chapter 23

 September 11th. Doncaster

 Doncaster!

 I shall, I think, remember that 11th of September all my life.

 Indeed, whenever I see a mention of the St Leger my mind flies automatically not to horse-racing but to
murder.

 When I recall my own sensations, the thing that stands out most is a sickening sense of insufficiency. We
were here—on the spot—Poirot, myself, FranklinClarke, Fraser, Megan Barnard, Thora Grey and Mary
Drower, and in the last resortwhat could any of us do?

 We were building on a forlorn hope—on the chance of recognizing amongst a crowd of thousands of
people a face or figure imperfectly seen on an occasion one, two or three months back.

 The odds were in reality greater than that. Of us all, the only person likely to make such a recognition
was Thora Grey.

 Some of her serenity had broken down under the strain. Her calm, efficient manner was gone. She sat



twisting her hands together, almost weeping, appealing incoherently to Poirot.

 ‘I never really looked at him…Why didn’t I? What a fool I was. You’re depending on me, all of
you…and I shall let you down. Because even if I did see him again I mightn’t recognize him. I’ve got a
bad memory for faces.’

 Poirot, whatever he might say to me, and however harshly he might seem to criticize the girl, showed
nothing but kindness now. His manner was tender in the extreme. It struck me that Poirot was no more
indifferent to beauty in distress than I was.

 He patted her shoulder kindly.

 ‘Now then,petite , not the hysteria. We cannot have that. If you should see this man you would
recognize him.’

 ‘How do you know?’

 ‘Oh, a great many reasons—for one, because the red succeeds the black.’

 ‘What do you mean, Poirot?’ I cried.

 ‘I speak the language of the tables. At roulette there may be a long run on the black—but in the endred
must turn up . It is the mathematical laws of chance.’

 ‘You mean that luck turns?’

 ‘Exactly, Hastings. And that is where the gambler (and the murderer, who is, after all, only a supreme
kind of gambler since what he risks is not his money but his life) often lacks intelligent anticipation.
Because hehas won he thinks he willcontinue to win! He does not leave the tables in good time with his
pocket full. So in crime the murderer who is successfulcannot conceive the possibility of not being
successful! He takes tohimself all the credit for a successful performance—but I tell you, my friends,
however carefully planned, no crime can be successful without luck!’

 ‘Isn’t that going rather far?’ demurred FranklinClarke.

 Poirot waved his hands excitedly.

 ‘No, no. It is an even chance, if you like, but itmust be in your favour. Consider! It might have happened
that someone enters Mrs Ascher’s shop just as the murderer is leaving. That person might have thought
of looking behind the counter, have seen the dead woman—and either laid hands on the murderer
straight away or else been able to give such an accurate description of him to the police that he would
have been arrested forthwith.’

 ‘Yes, of course, that’s possible,’ admitted FranklinClarke. ‘What it comes to is that a murderer’s got to take a
chance.’

 ‘Precisely. A murderer is always a gambler. And, like many gamblers, a murderer often does not know
when to stop. With each crime his opinion of his own abilities is strengthened. His sense of proportion is
warped. He does not say “I have been cleverand lucky !” No, he says only “I have been clever!” And his
opinion of his cleverness grows and then,mes amis , the ball spins, and the run of colour is over—it drops
into a new number and the croupier calls out“Rouge .”’



 ‘You think that will happen in this case?’ asked Megan, drawing her brows together in a frown.

 ‘Itmust happen sooner or later! So farthe luck has been with the criminal —sooner or later it must turn
and be with us. I believe that ithas turned! The clue of the stockings is the beginning. Now, instead of
everything goingright for him, everything will gowrong for him! And he, too, will begin to make
mistakes…’

 ‘I will say you’re heartening,’ said FranklinClarke.

 ‘We all need a bit of comfort. I’ve had a paralysing feeling of helplessness ever since I woke up.’

 ‘It seems to me highly problematical that we can accomplish anything of practical value,’ said Donald
Fraser.

 Megan rapped out:

 ‘Don’t be a defeatist, Don.’

 Mary Drower, flushing up a little, said:

 ‘What I say is, you never know. That wicked fiend’s in this place, and so are we—and after all, you do
run up against people in the funniest way sometimes.’

 I fumed:

 ‘If only we could do something more.’

 ‘You must remember, Hastings, that the police are doing everything reasonably possible. Special
constables have been enrolled. The good Inspector Crome may have the irritating manner, but he is a
very able police officer, and Colonel Anderson, the Chief Constable, is a man of action. They have taken
the fullest measures for watching and patrolling the town and the race-course. There will be plain-clothes
men everywhere. There is also the press campaign. The public is fully warned.’

 Donald Fraser shook his head.

 ‘He’ll never attempt it, I’m thinking,’ he said more hopefully. ‘The man would just be mad!’

 ‘Unfortunately,’ said FranklinClarke dryly, ‘he is mad! What do you think, M. Poirot? Will he give it up or will
he try to carry it through?’

 ‘In my opinion the strength of his obsession is such that hemust attempt to carry out his promise! Not to
do so would be to admit failure, and that his insane egoism would never allow. That, I may say, is also Dr
Thompson’s opinion. Our hope is that he may be caught in the attempt.’

 Donald shook his head again.

 ‘He’ll be very cunning.’

 Poirot glanced at his watch. We took the hint. It had been agreed that we were to make an all-day
session of it, patrolling as many streets as possible in the morning, and later, stationing ourselves at



various likely points on the race-course.

 I say ‘we’. Of course, in my own case such a patrol was of little avail since I was never likely to have set
eyes on A B C. However, as the idea was to separate so as to cover as wide an area as possible I had
suggested that I should act as escort to one of the ladies.

 Poirot had agreed—I am afraid with somewhat of a twinkle in his eye.

 The girls went off to get their hats on. Donald Fraser was standing by the window looking out,
apparently lost in thought.

 FranklinClarke glanced over at him, then evidently deciding that the other was too abstracted to count
as a listener, he lowered his voice a little and addressed Poirot.

 ‘Look here, M. Poirot. You went down to Churston, I know, and saw my sister-in-law. Did she
say—or hint—I mean—did she suggest at all—?’

 He stopped, embarrassed.

 Poirot answered with a face of blank innocence that aroused my strongest suspicions.

 ‘Comment?Did your sister-in-law say, hint, or suggest—what?’

 FranklinClarke got rather red.

 ‘Perhaps you think this isn’t a time for butting in with personal things—’

 ‘Du tout!’

 ‘But I feel I’d like to get things quite straight.’

 ‘An admirable course.’

 This time I think FranklinClarke began to suspect Poirot’s bland face of concealing some inner amusement. He
ploughed on rather heavily.

 ‘My sister-in-law’s an awfully nice woman—I’ve been very fond of her always—but of course she’s
been ill some time—and in that kind of illness—being given drugs and all that—one tends to—well, to
fancy things about people!’

 ‘Ah?’

 By now there was no mistaking the twinkle in Poirot’s eye.

 But FranklinClarke, absorbed in his diplomatic task, was past noticing it.

 ‘It’s about Thora—Miss Grey,’ he said.

 ‘Oh, it is of Miss Grey you speak?’ Poirot’s tone held innocent surprise.

 ‘Yes. Lady Clarke got certain ideas in her head. You see, Thora—Miss Grey is well, rather a



good-looking girl—’

 ‘Perhaps—yes,’ conceded Poirot.

 ‘And women, even the best of them, are a bit catty about other women. Of course, Thora was
invaluable to my brother—he always said she was the best secretary he ever had—and he was very fond
of her, too. But it was all perfectly straight and above-board. I mean, Thora isn’t the sort of girl—’

 ‘No?’ said Poirot helpfully.

 ‘But my sister-in-law got it into her head to be—well—jealous, I suppose. Not that she ever showed
anything. But after Car’s death, when there was a question of Miss Grey staying on—well, Charlotte cut
up rough. Of course, it’s partly the illness and the morphia and all that—Nurse Capstick says so—she
says we mustn’t blame Charlotte for getting these ideas into her head—’

 He paused.

 ‘Yes?’

 ‘What I want you to understand, M. Poirot, is that there isn’t anything in it at all. It’s just a sick woman’s
imaginings. Look here’—he fumbled in his pocket—‘here’s a letter I received from my brother when I
was in the Malay States. I’d like you to read it because it shows exactly what terms they were on.’

 Poirot took it. FranklinClarke came over beside him and with a pointing finger read some of the extracts out
loud.

 ‘—things go on here much as usual. Charlotte is moderately free from pain. I wish one could say more.
You may remember Thora Grey? She is a dear girl and a greater comfort to me than I can tell you. I
should not have known what to do through this bad time but for her. Her sympathy and interest are
unfailing. She has an exquisite taste and flair for beautiful things and shares my passion for Chinese art. I
was indeed lucky to find her. No daughter could be a closer or more sympathetic companion. Her life
had been a difficult and not always a happy one, but I am glad to feel that here she has a home and true
affection.

 ‘You see,’ said FranklinClarke,‘that’s how my brother felt to her. He thought of her like a daughter. What I
feel so unfair is the fact that the moment my brother is dead, his wife practically turns her out of the
house! Women really are devils, M. Poirot.’

 ‘Your sister-in-law is ill and in pain, remember.’

 ‘I know. That’s what I keep saying to myself. One mustn’t judge her. All the same, I thought I’d show
you this. I don’t want you to get a false impression of Thora from anything Lady Clarke may have said.’

 Poirot returned the letter.

 ‘I can assure you,’ he said, smiling, ‘that I never permit myself to get false impressions from anything
anyone tells me. I form my own judgments.’

 ‘Well,’ said FranklinClarke, stowing away the letter. ‘I’m glad I showed it to you anyway. Here come the girls.
We’d better be off.’



 As we left the room, Poirot called me back.

 ‘You are determined to accompany the expedition, Hastings?’

 ‘Oh, yes. I shouldn’t be happy staying here inactive.’

 ‘There is activity of mind as well as body, Hastings.’

 ‘Well, you’re better at it than I am,’ I said.

 ‘You are incontestably right, Hastings. Am I correct in supposing that you intend to be a cavalier to one
of the ladies?’

 ‘That was the idea.’

 ‘And which lady did you propose to honour with your company?’

 ‘Well—I—er—hadn’t considered yet.’

 ‘What about Miss Barnard?’

 ‘She’s rather the independent type,’ I demurred.

 ‘Miss Grey?’

 ‘Yes. She’s better.’

 ‘I find you, Hastings, singularly though transparently dishonest! All along you had made up your mind to
spend the day with your blonde angel!’

 ‘Oh, really, Poirot!’

 ‘I am sorry to upset your plans, but I must request you to give your escort elsewhere.’

 ‘Oh, all right. I think you’ve got a weakness for that Dutch doll of a girl.’

 ‘The person you are to escort is Mary Drower—and I must request you not to leave her.’

 ‘But, Poirot, why?’

 ‘Because, my dear friend, her name begins with a D. We must take no chances.’

 I saw the justice of his remark. At first it seemed far-fetched, but then I realized that if A B C had a
fanatical hatred of Poirot, he might very well be keeping himself informed of Poirot’s movements. And in
that case the elimination of Mary Drower might strike him as a very pat fourth stroke.

 I promised to be faithful to my trust.

 I went out leaving Poirot sitting in a chair near the window.

 In front of him was a little roulette wheel. He spun it as I went out of the door and called after me:



 ‘Rouge—that is a good omen, Hastings. The luck, it turns!’

 Chapter 24

 Not from Captain Hastings’ Personal Narrative

 Below his breath Mr Leadbetter uttered a grunt of impatience as his next-door neighbour got up and
stumbled clumsily past him, dropping his hat over the seat in front, and leaning over to retrieve it.

 All this at the culminating moment ofNot a Sparrow , that all-star, thrilling drama of pathos and beauty
that Mr Leadbetter had been looking forward to seeing for a whole week.

 The golden-haired heroine, played by Katherine Royal (in Mr Leadbetter’s opinion the leading film
actress in the world), was just giving vent to a hoarse cry of indignation:

 ‘Never. I would sooner starve. But I shan’t starve. Remember those words:not a sparrow falls —’

 Mr Leadbetter moved his head irritably from right to left. People! Why on earth people couldn’t wait till
theend of a film…And to leave at this soul-stirring moment.

 Ah, that was better. The annoying gentleman had passed on and out. Mr Leadbetter had a full view of
the screen and of Katherine Royal standing by the window in the Van Schreiner Mansion in New York.

 And now she was boarding the train—the child in her arms…What curious trains they had in
America—not at all like English trains.

 Ah, there was Steve again in his shack in the mountains…

 The film pursued its course to its emotional and semi-religious end.

 Mr Leadbetter breathed a sigh of satisfaction as the lights went up.

 He rose slowly to his feet, blinking a little.

 He never left the cinema very quickly. It always took him a moment or two to return to the prosaic
reality of everyday life.

 He glanced round. Not many people this afternoon—naturally. They were all at the races. Mr
Leadbetter did not approve of racing nor of playing cards nor of drinking nor of smoking. This left him
more energy to enjoy going to the pictures.

 Everyone was hurrying towards the exit. Mr Leadbetter prepared to follow suit. The man in the seat in
front of him was asleep—slumped down in his chair. Mr Leadbetter felt indignant to think that anyone
could sleep with such a drama asNot a Sparrow going on.

 An irate gentleman was saying to the sleeping man whose legs were stretched out blocking the way:

 ‘Excuseme , sir.’

 Mr Leadbetter reached the exit. He looked back.



 There seemed to be some sort of commotion. A commissionaire…a little knot of people…Perhaps that
man in front of him was dead drunk and not asleep…

 He hesitated and then passed out—and in so doing missed the sensation of the day—a greater sensation
even than Not Half winning the St Leger at 85 to 1.

 The commissionaire was saying:

 ‘Believe you’re right, sir…He’s ill…Why—what’s the matter, sir?’

 The other had drawn away his hand with an exclamation and was examining a red sticky smear.

 ‘Blood…’

 The commissionaire gave a stifled exclamation.

 He had caught sight of the corner of something yellow projecting from under the seat.

 ‘Gor blimey!’ he said.‘It’s a b—A B C .’

 Chapter 25

 Not from Captain Hastings’ Personal Narrative

 A.B.Cust  came out of the Regal Cinema and looked up at the sky.

 A beautiful evening…A really beautiful evening…

 A quotation from Browning came into his head.

 ‘God’s in His heaven. All’s right with the world.’

 He had always been fond of that quotation.

 Only there were times, very often, when he had felt it wasn’t true…

 He trotted along the street smiling to himself until he came to the Black Swan where he was staying.

 He climbed the stairs to his bedroom, a stuffy little room on the second floor, giving over a paved inner
court and garage.

 As he entered the room his smile faded suddenly. There was a stain on his sleeve near the cuff. He
touched it tentatively—wet and red—blood…

 His hand dipped into his pocket and brought out something—a long slender knife. The blade of that,
too, was sticky and red…

  A.B.Cust sat there a long time.

 Once his eyes shot round the room like those of a hunted animal.



 His tongue passed feverishly over his lips…

 ‘It isn’t my fault,’ said  A.B.Cust.

 He sounded as though he were arguing with somebody—a schoolboy pleading to his headmaster.

 He passed his tongue over his lips again…

 Again, tentatively, he felt his coat sleeve.

 His eyes crossed the room to the wash-basin.

 A Minute later he was pouring out water from the old-fashioned jug into the basin. Removing his coat,
he rinsed the sleeve, carefully squeezing it out…

 Ugh! The water was red now…

 A tap on the door.

 He stood there frozen into immobility—staring.

 The door opened. A plump young woman—jug in hand.

 ‘Oh, excuse me, sir. Your hot water, sir.’

 He managed to speak then.

 ‘Thank you…I’ve washed in cold…’

 Why had he said that? Immediately her eyes went to the basin.

 He said frenziedly: ‘I—I’ve cut my hand…’

 There was a pause—yes, surely a very long pause—before she said: ‘Yes, sir.’

 She went out, shutting the door.

 A.B.Cust stood as though turned to stone.

 He listened.

 It had come—at last…

 Were there voices—exclamations—feet mounting the stairs?

 He could hear nothing but the beating of his own heart…

 Then, suddenly, from frozen immobility he leaped into activity.

 He slipped on his coat, tiptoed to the door and opened it. No noises as yet except the familiar murmur



arising from the bar. He crept down the stairs…

 Still no one. That was luck. He paused at the foot of the stairs. Which way now?

 He made up his mind, darted quickly along a passage and out by the door that gave into the yard. A
couple of chauffeurs were there tinkering with cars and discussing winners and losers.

 A.B.Cust hurried across the yard and out into the street.

 Round the first corner to the right—then to the left—right again…

 Dare he risk the station?

 Yes—there would be crowds there—special trains— if luck were on his side he would do it all right…

 If only luck were with him…

 Chapter 26

 Not from Captain Hastings’ Personal Narrative

 Inspector Crome was listening to the excited utterances of Mr Leadbetter.

 ‘I assure you, inspector, my heart misses a beat when I think of it. He must actually have been sitting
beside me all through the programme!’

 Inspector Crome, completely indifferent to the behaviour of Mr Leadbetter’s heart, said:

 ‘Just let me have it quite clear? This man went out towards the close of the big picture—’

 ‘Not a Sparrow—Katherine Royal,’ murmured Mr Leadbetter automatically.

 ‘He passed you and in doing so stumbled—’

 ‘Hepretended to stumble, I see it now. Then he leaned over the seat in front to pick up his hat. He must
have stabbed the poor fellow then.’

 ‘You didn’t hear anything? A cry? Or a groan?’

 Mr Leadbetter had heard nothing but the loud, hoarse accents of Katherine Royal, but in the vividness of
his imagination he invented a groan.

 Inspector Crome took the groan at its face value and bade him proceed.

 ‘And then he went out—’

 ‘Can you describe him?’

 ‘He was a very big man. Six foot at least. A giant.’

 ‘Fair or dark?’



 ‘I—well—I’m not exactly sure. I think he was bald. A sinister-looking fellow.’

 ‘He didn’t limp, did he?’ asked Inspector Crome.

 ‘Yes—yes, now you come to speak of it I think he did limp. Very dark, he might have been some kind
of half-caste.’

 ‘Was he in his seat the last time the lights came up?’

 ‘No. He came in after the big picture began.’

 Inspector Crome nodded, handed Mr Leadbetter a statement to sign and got rid of him.

 ‘That’s about as bad a witness as you’ll find,’ he remarked pessimistically. ‘He’d say anything with a
little leading. It’s perfectly clear that he hasn’t the faintest idea what our man looks like. Let’s have the
commissionaire back.’

 The commissionaire, very stiff and military, came in and stood to attention, his eyes fixed on Colonel
Anderson.

 ‘Now, then, Jameson, let’s hear your story.’

 Jameson saluted.

 ‘Yes sir. Close of the performance, sir. I was told there was a gentleman taken ill, sir. Gentleman was in
the two and fourpennies, slumped down in his seat like. Other gentlemen standing around. Gentleman
looked bad to me, sir. One of the gentlemen standing by put his hand to the ill gentleman’s coat and drew
my attention. Blood, sir. It was clear the gentleman was dead—stabbed, sir. My attention was drawn to
an A B C railway guide, sir, under the seat. Wishing to act correctly, I did not touch same, but reported
to the police immediately that a tragedy had occurred.’

 ‘Very good. Jameson, you acted very properly.’

 ‘Thank you, sir.’

 ‘Did you notice a man leaving the two and fourpennies about five minutes earlier?’

 ‘There were several, sir.’

 ‘Could you describe them?’

 ‘Afraid not, sir. One was Mr Geoffrey Parnell. And there was a young fellow, Sam Baker, with his
young lady. I didn’t notice anybody else particular.’

 ‘A pity. That’ll do, Jameson.’

 ‘Yes sir.’

 The commissionaire saluted and departed.



 ‘The medical details we’ve got,’ said Colonel Anderson. ‘We’d better have the fellow that found him
next.’

 A police constable came in and saluted.

 ‘Mr Hercule Poirot’s here, sir, and another gentleman.’

 Inspector Crome frowned.

 ‘Oh, well,’ he said. ‘Better have ’em in, I suppose.’

 Chapter 27

 The Doncaster Murder

 Coming in hard on Poirot’s heels, I just caught the fag end of Inspector Crome’s remark.

 Both he and the Chief Constable were looking worried and depressed.

 Colonel Anderson greeted us with a nod of the head.

 ‘Glad you’ve come, M. Poirot,’ he said politely. I think he guessed that Crome’s remark might have
reached our ears. ‘We’ve got it in the neck again, you see.’

 ‘Another A B C murder?’

 ‘Yes. Damned audacious bit of work. Man leaned over and stabbed the fellow in the back.’

 ‘Stabbed this time?’

 ‘Yes, varies his methods a bit, doesn’t he? Biff on the head, strangled, now a knife. Versatile
devil—what? Here are the medical details if you care to see ’em.’

 He shoved a paper towards Poirot. ‘A B C down on the floor between the dead man’s feet,’ he added.

 ‘Has the dead man been identified?’ asked Poirot.

 ‘Yes. A B C’s slipped up for once—if that’s any satisfaction to us. Deceased’s a man called
Earlsfield—George Earlsfield. Barber by profession.’

 ‘Curious,’ commented Poirot.

 ‘May have skipped a letter,’ suggested the colonel.

 My friend shook his head doubtfully.

 ‘Shall we have in the next witness?’ asked Crome. ‘He’s anxious to get home.’

 ‘Yes, yes—let’s get on.’

 A middle-aged gentleman strongly resembling the frog footman inAlice in Wonderland was led in. He



was highly excited and his voice was shrill with emotion.

 ‘Most shocking experience I have ever known,’ he squeaked. ‘I have a weak heart, sir—a very weak
heart, it might have been the death of me.’

 ‘Your name, please,’ said the inspector.

 ‘Downes. Roger Emmanuel Downes.’

 ‘Profession?’

 ‘I am a master at Highfield School for boys.’

 ‘Now, Mr Downes, will you tell us in your own words what happened.’

 ‘I can tell you that very shortly, gentlemen. At the close of the performance I rose from my seat. The
seat on my left was empty but in the one beyond a man was sitting, apparently asleep. I was unable to
pass him to get out as his legs were stuck out in front of him. I asked him to allow me to pass. As he did
not move I repeated my request in—a—er—slightly louder tone. He still made no response. I then took
him by the shoulder to waken him. His body slumped down further and I became aware that he was
either unconscious or seriously ill. I called out: “This gentleman is taken ill. Fetch the commissionaire.”
The commissionaire came. As I took my hand from the man’s shoulder I found it was wet and red…I
can assure you, gentlemen, the shock was terrific! Anything might have happened! For years I have
suffered from cardiac weakness—’

 Colonel Anderson was looking at Mr Downes with a very curious expression.

 ‘You can consider that you’re a lucky man, Mr Downes.’

 ‘I do, sir. Not even a palpitation!’

 ‘You don’t quite take my meaning, Mr Downes. You were sitting two seats away, you say?’

 ‘Actually I was sitting at first in the next seat to the murdered man—then I moved along so as to be
behind an empty seat.’

 ‘You’re about the same height and build as the dead man, aren’t you, and you were wearing a woollen
scarf round your neck just as he was?’

 ‘I fail to see—’ began Mr Downes stiffly.

 ‘I’m telling you, man,’ said Colonel Anderson, ‘just where your luck came in. Somehow or other, when
the murderer followed you in, he got confused.He picked on the wrong back . I’ll eat my hat, Mr
Downes, if that knife wasn’t meant for you!’

 However well Mr Downes’ heart had stood former tests, it was unable to stand up to this one. He sank
on a chair, gasped, and turned purple in the face.

 ‘Water,’ he gasped. ‘Water…’

 A glass was brought him. He sipped it whilst his complexion gradually returned to the normal.



 ‘Me?’ he said. ‘Why me?’

 ‘It looks like it,’ said Crome. ‘In fact, it’s the only explanation.’

 ‘You mean that this man—this—this fiend incarnate—this bloodthirsty madman has been followingme
about waiting for an opportunity?’

 ‘I should say that was the way of it.’

 ‘But in heaven’s name, whyme ?’ demanded the outraged schoolmaster.

 Inspector Crome struggled with the temptation to reply: ‘Why not?’ and said instead: ‘I’m afraid it’s no
good expecting a lunatic to have reasons for what he does.’

 ‘God bless my soul,’ said Mr Downes, sobered into whispering.

 He got up. He looked suddenly old and shaken.

 ‘If you don’t want me any more, gentlemen, I think I’ll go home. I—I don’t feel very well.’

 ‘That’s quite all right, Mr Downes. I’ll send a constable with you—just to see you’re all right.’

 ‘Oh, no—no, thank you. That’s not necessary.’

 ‘Might as well,’ said Colonel Anderson gruffly.

 His eyes slid sideways, asking an imperceptible question of the inspector. The latter gave an equally
imperceptible nod.

 Mr Downes went out shakily.

 ‘Just as well he didn’t tumble to it,’ said Colonel Anderson. ‘There’ll be a couple of them—eh?’

 ‘Yes, sir. Your Inspector Rice has made arrangements. The house will be watched.’

 ‘You think,’ said Poirot, ‘that when A B C finds out his mistake he might try again?’

 Anderson nodded.

 ‘It’s a possibility,’ he said. ‘Seems a methodical sort of chap, A B C. It will upset him if things don’t go
according to programme.’

 Poirot nodded thoughtfully.

 ‘Wish we could get a description of the fellow,’ said Colonel Anderson irritably. ‘We’re as much in the
dark as ever.’

 ‘It may come,’ said Poirot.

 ‘Think so? Well, it’s possible. Damn it all, hasn’t anyone got eyes in their head?’



 ‘Have patience,’ said Poirot.

 ‘You seem very confident, M. Poirot. Got any reason for this optimism?’

 ‘Yes, Colonel Anderson. Up to now, the murderer has not made a mistake. He is bound to make one
soon.’

 ‘If that’s all you’ve got to go on,’ began the Chief Constable with a snort, but he was interrupted.

 ‘Mr Ball of the Black Swan is here with a young woman, sir. He reckons he’s got summat to say might
help you.’

 ‘Bring them along. Bring them along. We can do with anything helpful.’

 Mr Ball of the Black Swan was a large, slow-thinking, heavily moving man. He exhaled a strong odour
of beer. With him was a plump young woman with round eyes clearly in a state of high excitement.

 ‘Hope I’m not intruding or wasting valuable time,’ said Mr Ball in a slow, thick voice. ‘But this wench,
Mary here, reckons she’s got something to tell as you ought to know.’

 Mary giggled in a half-hearted way.

 ‘Well, my girl, what is it?’ said Anderson. ‘What’s your name?’

 ‘Mary, sir, Mary Stroud.’

 ‘Well, Mary, out with it.’

 Mary turned her round eyes on her master.

 ‘It’s her business to take up hot water to the gents’ bedrooms,’ said Mr Ball, coming to the rescue.
‘About half a dozen gentlemen we’d got staying. Some for the races and some just commercials.’

 ‘Yes, yes,’ said Anderson impatiently.

 ‘Get on, lass,’ said Mr Ball. ‘Tell your tale. Nowt to be afraid of.’

 Mary gasped, groaned and plunged in a breathless voice into her narrative.

 ‘I knocked on door and there wasn’t no answer, otherwise I wouldn’t have gone in least ways not
unless the gentleman had said “Come in,” and as he didn’t say nothing I went in and he was there
washing his hands.’

 She paused and breathed deeply.

 ‘Go on, my girl,’ said Anderson.

 Mary looked sideways at her master and as though receiving inspiration from his slow nod, plunged on
again.



 ‘“It’s your hot water, sir,” I said, “and I did knock,” but “Oh,” he says, “I’ve washed in cold,” he said,
and so, naturally, I looks in basin, and oh! God help me, sir,it were all red! ’

 ‘Red?’ said Anderson sharply.

 Ball struck in.

 ‘The lass told me that he had his coat off and that he was holding the sleeve of it, and it was all
wet—that’s right, eh, lass?’

 ‘Yes, sir, that’s right, sir.’

 She plunged on:

 ‘And his face, sir, it looked queer, mortal queer it looked. Gave me quite a turn.’

 ‘When was this?’ asked Anderson sharply.

 ‘About a quarter after five, so near as I can reckon.’

 ‘Over three hours ago,’ snapped Anderson. ‘Why didn’t you come at once?’

 ‘Didn’t hear about it at once,’ said Ball. ‘Not till news came along as there’d been another murder done.
And then the lass she screams out as it might have been blood in the basin, and I asks her what she
means, and she tells me. Well, it doesn’t sound right to me and I went upstairs myself. Nobody in the
room. I asks a few questions and one of the lads in courtyard says he saw a fellow sneaking out that way
and by his description it was the right one. So I says to the missus as Mary here had best go to police.
She doesn’t like the idea, Mary doesn’t, and I says I’ll come along with her.’

 Inspector Crome drew a sheet of paper towards him.

 ‘Describe this man,’ he said. ‘As quick as you can. There’s no time to be lost.’

 ‘Medium-sized he were,’ said Mary. ‘And stooped and wore glasses.’

 ‘His clothes?’

 ‘A dark suit and a Homburg hat. Rather shabby-looking.’

 She could add little to this description.

 Inspector Crome did not insist unduly. The telephone wires were soon busy, but neither the inspector
nor the Chief Constable were over-optimistic.

 Crome elicited the fact that the man, when seen sneaking across the yard, had had no bag or suitcase.

 ‘There’s a chance there,’ he said.

 Two men were despatched to the Black Swan.

 Mr Ball, swelling with pride and importance, and Mary, somewhat tearful, accompanied them.



 The sergeant returned about ten minutes later.

 ‘I’ve brought the register, sir,’ he said. ‘Here’s the signature.’

 We crowded round. The writing was small and cramped—not easy to read.

 ‘A. B. Case—or is it Cash?’ said the Chief Constable.

 ‘A B C,’ said Crome significantly.

 ‘What about luggage?’ asked Anderson.

 ‘One good-sized suitcase, sir, full of small cardboard boxes.’

 ‘Boxes? What was in ’em?’

 ‘Stockings, sir. Silk stockings.’

 Crome turned to Poirot.

 ‘Congratulations,’ he said. ‘Your hunch was right.’

 Chapter 28

 Not from Captain Hastings’ Personal Narrative

 Inspector Crome was in his office at Scotland Yard.

 The telephone on his desk gave a discreet buzz and he picked it up.

 ‘Jacobs speaking, sir. There’s a young fellow come in with a story that I think you ought to hear.’

 Inspector Crome sighed. On an average twenty people a day turned up with so-called important
information about the A B C case. Some of them were harmless lunatics, some of them were
well-meaning persons who genuinely believed that their information was of value. It was the duty of
Sergeant Jacobs to act as a human sieve—retaining the grosser matter and passing on the residue to his
superior.

 ‘Very well, Jacobs,’ said Crome. ‘Send him along.’

 A few minutes later there was a tap on the inspector’s door and Sergeant Jacobs appeared, ushering in
a tall, moderately good-looking young man.

 ‘This is Mr Tom Hartigan, sir. He’s got something to tell us which may have a possible bearing on the A
B C case.’

 The inspector rose pleasantly and shook hands.

 ‘Good morning, Mr Hartigan. Sit down, won’t you? Smoke? Have a cigarette?’



 Tom Hartigan sat down awkwardly and looked with some awe at what he called in his own mind ‘One
of the big-wigs.’ The appearance of the inspector vaguely disappointed him. He looked quite an ordinary
person!

 ‘Now then,’ said Crome. ‘You’ve got something to tell us that you think may have a bearing on the
case. Fire ahead.’

 Tom began nervously.

 ‘Of course it may be nothing at all. It’s just an idea of mine. I may be wasting your time.’

 Again Inspector Crome sighed imperceptibly. The amount of time he had to waste in reassuring people!

 ‘We’re the best judge of that. Let’s have the facts, Mr Hartigan.’

 ‘Well, it’s like this, sir. I’ve got a young lady, you see, and her mother lets rooms. Up Camden Town
way. Their second-floor back has been let for over a year to a man called A.B.Cust.’

 ‘A.B.Cust—eh?’

 ‘That’s right, sir. A sort of middle-aged bloke what’s rather vague and soft—and come down in the
world a bit, I should say. Sort of creature who wouldn’t hurt a fly you’d say—and I’d never of dreamed
of anything being wrong if it hadn’t been for something rather odd.’

 In a somewhat confused manner and repeating himself once or twice, Tom described his encounter with
 A.B.Cust at Euston Station and the incident of the dropped ticket.

 ‘You see, sir, look at it how you will, it’s funny like. Lily—that’s my young lady, sir—she was quite
positive that it was Cheltenham he said, and her mother says the same—says she remembers distinct
talking about it the morning he went off. Of course, I didn’t pay much attention to it at the time. Lily—my
young lady—said as how she hoped he wouldn’t cop it from this A B C fellow going to Doncaster—and
then she says it’s rather a coincidence because he was down Churston way at the time of the last crime.
Laughing like, I asks her whether he was at Bexhill the time before, and she says she don’t know where
he was, but he was away at the seaside—that she does know. And then I said to her it would be odd if
he was the A B C himself and she said poor  A.B.Cust wouldn’t hurt a fly—and that was all at the time.
We didn’t think no more about it. At least, in a sort of way I did, sir, underneath like. I began wondering
about this A.B.Cust fellow and thinking that, after all, harmless as he seemed, he might be a bit batty.’

 Tom took a breath and then went on. Inspector Crome was listening intently now.

 ‘And then after the Doncaster murder, sir, it was in all the papers that information was wanted as to the
whereabouts of a certain A B Case or Cash, and it gave a description that fitted well enough. First
evening off I had, I went round to Lily’s and asked her what her  A.B.Cust’s initials were. She couldn’t
remember at first, but her mother did. Said they were A B right enough. Then we got down to it and tried
to figure out if A.B.Cust had been away at the time of the first murder at Andover. Well, as you know, sir, it
isn’t too easy to remember things three months back. We had a job of it, but we got it fixed down in the
end, because Mrs Marbury had a brother come from Canada to see her on June 21st. He arrived
unexpected like and she wanted to give him a bed, and Lily suggested that as  A.B.Cust was away Bert
Smith might have his bed. But Mrs Marbury wouldn’t agree, because she said it wasn’t acting right by
her lodger, and she always liked to act fair and square. But we fixed the date all right because of Bert
Smith’s ship docking at Southampton that day.’



 Inspector Crome had listened very attentively, jotting down an occasional note.

 ‘That’s all?’ he asked.

 ‘That’s all, sir. I hope you don’t think I’m making a lot of nothing.’

 Tom flushed slightly.

 ‘Not at all. You were quite right to come here. Of course, it’s very slight evidence—these dates may be
mere coincidence and the likeness of the name, too. But it certainly warrants my having an interview with
your  A.B.Cust. Is he at home now?’

 ‘Yes, sir.’

 ‘When did he return?’

 ‘The evening of the Doncaster murder, sir.’

 ‘What’s he been doing since?’

 ‘He’s stayed in mostly, sir. And he’s been looking very queer, Mrs Marbury says. He buys a lot of
newspapers—goes out early and gets the morning ones, and then after dark he goes out and gets the
evening ones. Mrs Marbury says he talks a lot to himself, too. She thinks he’s getting queerer.’

 ‘What is this Mrs Marbury’s address?’

 Tom gave it to him.

 ‘Thank you. I shall probably be calling round in the course of the day. I need hardly tell you to be careful
of your manner if you come across this A.B.Cust.’

 He rose and shook hands.

 ‘You may be quite satisfied you did the right thing in coming to us. Good morning, Mr Hartigan.’

 ‘Well, sir?’ asked Jacobs, re-entering the room a few minutes later. ‘Think it’s the goods?’

 ‘It’s promising,’ said Inspector Crome. ‘That is, if the facts are as the boy stated them. We’ve had no
luck with the stocking manufacturers yet. It was time we got hold of something. By the way, give me that
file of the Churston case.’

 He spent some minutes looking for what he wanted.

 ‘Ah, here it is. It’s amongst the statements made to the Torquay police. Young man of the name of Hill.
Deposes he was leaving the Torquay Palladium after the filmNot a Sparrow and noticed a man behaving
queerly. He was talking to himself. Hill heard him say “That’s an idea.”Not a Sparrow —that’s the film
that was on at the Regal in Doncaster?’

 ‘Yes, sir.’



 ‘There may be something in that. Nothing to it at the time—but it’s possible that the idea of themodus
operandi for his next crime occurred to our man then. We’ve got Hill’s name and address, I see. His
description of the man is vague but it links up well enough with the descriptions of Mary Stroud and this
Tom Hartigan…’

 He nodded thoughtfully.

 ‘We’re getting warm,’ said Inspector Crome—rather inaccurately, for he himself was always slightly
chilly.

 ‘Any instructions, sir?’

 ‘Put on a couple of men to watch this Camden Town address, but I don’t want our bird frightened. I
must have a word with the AC. Then I think it would be as well if A.B.Cust was brought along here and
asked if he’d like to make a statement. It sounds as though he’s quite ready to get rattled.’

 Outside Tom Hartigan had rejoined Lily Marbury who was waiting for him on the Embankment.

 ‘All right, Tom?’

 Tom nodded.

 ‘I saw Inspector Crome himself. The one who’s in charge of the case.’

 ‘What’s he like?’

 ‘A bit quiet and lah-di-dah—not my idea of a detective.’

 ‘That’s Lord Trenchard’s new kind,’ said Lily with respect. ‘Some of them are ever so grand. Well,
what did he say?’

 Tom gave her a brief résuméof the interview.

 ‘So they think as it really was him?’

 ‘They think it might be. Anyway, they’ll come along and ask him a question or two.’

 ‘Poor  A.B.Cust.’

 ‘It’s no good saying poor  A.B.Cust, my girl. If he’s A B C, he’s committed four terrible murders.’

 Lily sighed and shook her head.

 ‘It does seem awful,’ she observed.

 ‘Well, now you’re going to come and have a bite of lunch, my girl. Just you think that if we’re right I
expect my name will be in the papers!’

 ‘Oh, Tom, will it?’

 ‘Rather. And yours, too.And your mother’s. And I dare say you’ll have your picture in it, too.’



 ‘Oh, Tom.’ Lily squeezed his arm in an ecstasy.

 ‘And in the meantime what do you say to a bite at the Corner House?’

 Lily squeezed tighter.

 ‘Come on then!’

 ‘All right—half a minute. I must just telephone from the station.’

 ‘Who to?’

 ‘A girl I was going to meet.’

 She slipped across the road, and rejoined him three minutes later, looking rather flushed.

 ‘Now then, Tom.’

 She slipped her arm in his.

 ‘Tell me more about Scotland Yard. You didn’t see the other one there?’

 ‘What other one?’

 ‘The Belgian gentleman. The one that A B C writes to always.’

 ‘No. He wasn’t there.’

 ‘Well, tell me all about it. What happened when you got inside? Who did you speak to and what did you
say?’

 II
  A.B.Cust put the receiver back very gently on the hook.

 He turned to where Mrs Marbury was standing in the doorway of the room, clearly devoured with
curiosity.

 ‘Not often you have a telephone call,  A.B.Cust?’

 ‘No—er—no, Mrs Marbury. It isn’t.’

 ‘Not bad news, I trust?’

 ‘No—no.’ How persistent the woman was. His eyes caught the legend on the newspaper he was
carrying.

 Births—Marriages—Deaths…



 ‘My sister’s just had a little boy,’ he blurted out.

 He—who had never had a sister!

 ‘Oh, dear! Now—well, thatis nice, I am sure. (“And never once mentioned a sister all these years,” was
her inward thought. “If that isn’t just like a man!”) I was surprised, I’ll tell you, when the lady asked to
speak to A.B.Cust. Just at first I fancied it was my Lily’s voice—something like hers, it was—but
haughtier if you know what I mean—sort of high up in the air. Well,  A.B.Cust, my congratulations, I’m
sure. Is it the first one, or have you other little nephews and nieces?’

 ‘It’s the only one,’ said A.B.Cust. ‘The only one I’ve ever had or likely to have, and—er—I think I must
go off at once. They—they want me to come. I—I think I can just catch a train if I hurry.’

 ‘Will you be away long, A.B.Cust?’ called Mrs Marbury as he ran up the stairs.

 ‘Oh, no—two or three days—that’s all.’

 He disappeared into his bedroom. Mrs Marbury retired into the kitchen, thinking sentimentally of ‘the
dear little mite’.

 Her conscience gave her a sudden twinge.

 Last night Tom and Lily and all the hunting back over dates! Trying to make out that  A.B.Cust was that
dreadful monster, A B C. Just because of his initials and because of a few coincidences.

 ‘I don’t suppose they meant it seriously,’ she thought comfortably. ‘And now I hope they’ll be ashamed
of themselves.’

 In some obscure way that she could not have explained,  A.B.Cust’s statement that his sister had had a
baby had effectually removed any doubts Mrs Marbury might have had of her lodger’sbona fides .

 ‘I hope she didn’t have too hard a time of it, poor dear,’ thought Mrs Marbury, testing an iron against
her cheek before beginning to iron out Lily’s silk slip.

 Her mind ran comfortably on a well-worn obstetric track.

 A.B.Cust came quietly down the stairs, a bag in his hand. His eyes rested a minute on the telephone.

 That brief conversation re-echoed in his brain.

 ‘Is that you,  A.B.Cust? I thought you might like to know there’s an inspector from Scotland Yard may be
coming to see you…’

 What had he said? He couldn’t remember.

 ‘Thank you—thank you, my dear…very kind of you…’

 Something like that.

 Why had she telephoned to him? Could she possibly have guessed? Or did she just want to make sure
he would stay in for the inspector’s visit?



 But how did she know the inspector was coming?

 And her voice—she’d disguised her voice from her mother…

 It looked—it looked—as though sheknew …

 But surely if she knew, she wouldn’t…

 She might, though. Women were very queer. Unexpectedly cruel and unexpectedly kind. He’d seen Lily
once letting a mouse out of a mouse-trap.

 A kind girl…

 A kind, pretty girl…

 He paused by the hall stand with its load of umbrellas and coats.

 Should he…?

 A slight noise from the kitchen decided him…

 No, there wasn’t time…

 Mrs Marbury might come out…

 He opened the front door, passed through and closed it behind him…

 Where…?

 Chapter 29

 At Scotland Yard

 Conference again.

 The Assistant Commissioner, Inspector Crome, Poirot and myself.

 The AC was saying:

 ‘A good tip that of yours, M. Poirot, about checking a large sale of stockings.’

 Poirot spread out his hands.

 ‘It was indicated. This man could not be a regular agent. He sold outright instead of touting for orders.’

 ‘Got everything clear so far, inspector?’

 ‘I think so, sir.’ Crome consulted a file. ‘Shall I run over the position to date?’

 ‘Yes, please.’



 ‘I’ve checked up with Churston, Paignton and Torquay. Got a list of people where he went and offered
stockings. I must say he did the thing thoroughly. Stayed at the Pitt, small hotel near Torre Station.
Returned to the hotel at 10.30 on the night of the murder. Could have taken a train from Churston at
9.57, getting to Torre at 10.20. No one answering to his description noticed on train or at station, but
that Friday was Dartmouth Regatta and the trains back from Kingswear were pretty full.

 ‘Bexhill much the same. Stayed at the Globe under his own name. Offered stockings to about a dozen
addresses, including Mrs Barnard and including the Ginger Cat. Left hotel early in the evening. Arrived
back in London about 11.30 the following morning. As to Andover, same procedure. Stayed at the
Feathers. Offered stockings to Mrs Fowler, next door to Mrs Ascher, and to half a dozen other people
in the street. The pair Mrs Ascher had I got from the niece (name of Drower)—they’re identical with
A.B.Cust’s supply.’

 ‘So far, good,’ said the AC.

 ‘Acting on information received,’ said the inspector, ‘I went to the address given me by Hartigan, but
found that A.B.Cust had left the house about half an hour previously. He received a telephone message, I’m
told. First time such a thing had happened to him, so his landlady told me.’

 ‘An accomplice?’ suggested the Assistant Commissioner.

 ‘Hardly,’ said Poirot. ‘It is odd that—unless—’

 We all looked at him inquiringly as he paused.

 He shook his head, however, and the inspector proceeded.

 ‘I made a thorough search of the room he had occupied. That search puts the matter beyond doubt. I
found a block of notepaper similar to that on which the letters were written, a large quantity of hosiery
and—at the back of the cupboard where the hosiery was stored—a parcel much the same shape and
size but which turned out to contain—not hosiery—but eight new A B C railway guides!’

 ‘Proof positive,’ said the Assistant Commissioner.

 ‘I’ve found something else, too,’ said the inspector—his voice becoming suddenly almost human with
triumph. ‘Only found it this morning, sir. Not had time to report yet. There was no sign of the knife in his
room—’

 ‘It would be the act of an imbecile to bring that back with him,’ remarked Poirot.

 ‘After all, he’s not a reasonable human being,’ remarked the inspector. ‘Anway, it occurred to me that
he might just possibly have brought it back to the house and then realized the danger of hiding it (as M.
Poirot points out) in his room, and have looked about elsewhere. What place in the house would he be
likely to select? I got it straight away.The hall stand —no one ever moves a hall stand. With a lot of
trouble I got it moved out from the wall—and there it was!’

 ‘The knife?’

 ‘The knife. Not a doubt of it. The dried blood’s still on it.’



 ‘Good work, Crome,’ said the AC approvingly. ‘We only need one thing more now.’

 ‘What’s that?’

 ‘The man himself.’

 ‘We’ll get him, sir. Never fear.’

 The inspector’s tone was confident.

 ‘What do you say, M. Poirot?’

 Poirot started out of a reverie.

 ‘I beg your pardon?’

 ‘We were saying that it was only a matter of time before we got our man. Do you agree?’

 ‘Oh, that—yes. Without a doubt.’

 His tone was so abstracted that the others looked at him curiously.

 ‘Is there anything worrying you, M. Poirot?’

 ‘There is something that worries me very much. It is thewhy? Themotive .’

 ‘But, my dear fellow, the man’s crazy,’ said the Assistant Commissioner impatiently.

 ‘I understand what M. Poirot means,’ said Crome, coming graciously to the rescue. ‘He’s quite right.
There’s got to be some definite obsession. I think we’ll find the root of the matter in an intensified
inferiority complex. There may be a persecution mania, too, and if so he may possibly associate M.
Poirot with it. He may have the delusion that M. Poirot is a detective employed on purpose to hunt him
down.’

 ‘H’m,’ said the AC. ‘That’s the jargon that’s talked nowadays. In my day if a man was mad he was
mad and we didn’t look about for scientific terms to soften it down. I suppose a thoroughly up-to-date
doctor would suggest putting a man like A B C in a nursing home, telling him what a fine fellow he was
for forty-five days on end and then letting him out as a responsible member of society.’

 Poirot smiled but did not answer.

 The conference broke up.

 ‘Well,’ said the Assistant Commissioner. ‘As you say, Crome, pulling him in is only a matter of time.’

 ‘We’d have had him before now,’ said the inspector, ‘if he wasn’t so ordinary-looking. We’ve worried
enough perfectly inoffensive citizens as it is.’

 ‘I wonder where he is at this minute,’ said the Assistant Commissioner.

 Chapter 30



 Not from Captain Hastings’ Personal Narrative

  A.B.Cust stood by a greengrocer’s shop.

 He stared across the road.

 Yes, that was it.

 Mrs Ascher. Newsagent and Tobacconist…

 In the empty window was a sign.

 To Let.

 Empty…

 Lifeless…

 ‘Excuse me, sir.’

 The greengrocer’s wife, trying to get at some lemons.

 He apologized, moved to one side.

 Slowly he shuffled away—back towards the main street of the town…

 It was difficult—very difficult—now that he hadn’t any money left…

 Not having had anything to eat all day made one feel very queer and light-headed…

 He looked at a poster outside a newsagent’s shop.

 The A B C Case. Murderer Still at Large. Interviews with M. Hercule Poirot.

  A.B.Cust said to himself:

 ‘Hercule Poirot. I wonder ifhe knows…’

 He walked on again.

 It wouldn’t do to stand staring at that poster…

 He thought:

 ‘I can’t go on much longer…’

 Foot in front of foot…what an odd thing walking was…

 Foot in front of foot—ridiculous.



 Highly ridiculous…

 But man was a ridiculous animal anyway…

 And he, A.B.Cust, was particularly ridiculous.

 He had always been…

 People had always laughed at him…

 He couldn’t blame them…

 Where was he going? He didn’t know. He’d come to the end. He no longer looked anywhere but at his
feet.

 Foot in front of foot.

 He looked up. Lights in front of him. And letters…

 Police Station.

 ‘That’s funny,’ said  A.B.Cust. He gave a little giggle.

 Then he stepped inside. Suddenly, as he did so, he swayed and fell forward.

 Chapter 31

 Hercule Poirot Asks Questions

 It was a clear November day. Dr Thompson and Chief Inspector Japp had come round to acquaint
Poirot with the result of the police court proceedings in the case of Rexv .  A.B.Cust.

 Poirot himself had had a slight bronchial chill which had prevented his attending. Fortunately he had not
insisted on having my company.

 ‘Committed for trial,’ said Japp. ‘So that’s that.’

 ‘Isn’t it unusual?’ I asked, ‘for a defence to be offered at this stage? I thought prisoners always reserved
their defence.’

 ‘It’s the usual course,’ said Japp. ‘I suppose young Lucas thought he might rush it through. He’s a trier, I
will say. Insanity’s the only defence possible.’

 Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

 ‘With insanity there can be no acquittal. Imprisonment during His Majesty’s pleasure is hardly preferable
to death.’

 ‘I suppose Lucas thought there was a chance,’ said Japp. ‘With a first-class alibi for the Bexhill murder,
the whole case might be weakened. I don’t think he realized how strong our case is. Anyway, Lucas
goes in for originality. He’s a young man, and he wants to hit the public eye.’



 Poirot turned to Thompson.

 ‘What’s your opinion, doctor?’

 ‘Of A.B.Cust? Upon my soul, I don’t know what to say. He’s playing the sane man remarkably well. He’s
an epileptic, of course.’

 ‘What an amazing dénouement that was,’ I said.

 ‘His falling into the Andover police station in a fit? Yes—it was a fitting dramatic curtain to the drama. A
B C has always timed his effects well.’

 ‘Is it possible to commit a crime and be unaware of it?’ I asked. ‘His denials seem to have a ring of truth
in them.’

 Dr Thompson smiled a little.

 ‘You mustn’t be taken in by that theatrical “I swear by God” pose. It’s my opinionthat A.B.Cust knows
perfectly well he committed the murders .’

 ‘When they’re as fervent as that they usually do,’ said Crome.

 ‘As to your question,’ went on Thompson, ‘it’s perfectly possible for an epileptic subject in a state of
somnambulism to commit an action and be entirely unaware of having done so. But it is the general
opinion that such an action must “not be contrary to the will of the person in the waking state”.’

 He went on discussing the matter, speaking ofgrand mal andpetit mal and, to tell the truth, confusing me
hopelessly as is often the case when a learned person holds forth on his own subject.

 ‘However, I’m against the theory that A.B.Cust committed these crimes without knowing he’d done them.
You might put that theory forward if it weren’t for the letters. The letters knock the theory on the head.
They show premeditation and a careful planning of the crime.’

 ‘And of the letters we have still no explanation,’ said Poirot.

 ‘That interests you?’

 ‘Naturally—since they were written to me. And on the subject of the letters A.B.Cust is persistently dumb.
Until I get at the reason for those letters being written to me, I shall not feel that the case is solved.’

 ‘Yes—I can understand that from your point of view. There doesn’t seem to be any reason to believe
that the man ever came up against you in any way?’

 ‘None whatever.’

 ‘I might make a suggestion. Your name!’

 ‘My name?’

 ‘Yes. A.B.Cust is saddled—apparently by the whim of his mother (Oedipus complex there, I shouldn’t



wonder!)—with two extremely bombastic Christian names: Alexander and Bonaparte. You see the
implications? Alexander—the popularly supposed undefeatable who sighed for more worlds to conquer.
Bonaparte—the great Emperor of the French. He wants an adversary—an adversary, one might say, in
his class. Well—there you are—Hercules the strong.’

 ‘Your words are very suggestive, doctor. They foster ideas…’

 ‘Oh, it’s only a suggestion. Well, I must be off.’

 Dr Thompson went out. Japp remained.

 ‘Does this alibi worry you?’ Poirot asked.

 ‘It does a little,’ admitted the inspector. ‘Mind you, I don’t believe in it, because I know it isn’t true. But
it is going to be the deuce to break it. This man Strange is a tough character.’

 ‘Describe him to me.’

 ‘He’s a man of forty. A tough, confident, self-opinionated mining engineer. It’s my opinion that it was he
who insisted on his evidence being taken now. He wants to get off to Chile. He hoped the thing might be
settled out of hand.’

 ‘He’s one of the most positive people I’ve ever seen,’ I said.

 ‘The type of man who would not like to admit he was mistaken,’ said Poirot thoughtfully.

 ‘He sticks to his story and he’s not one to be heckled. He swears by all that’s blue that he picked up
A.B.Cust in the Whitecross Hotel at Eastbourne on the evening of July 24th. He was lonely and wanted
someone to talk to. As far as I can see, A.B.Cust made an ideal listener. He didn’t interrupt! After dinner he
and A.B.Cust played dominoes. It appears Strange was a whale on dominoes and to his surprise A.B.Cust was
pretty hot stuff too. Queer game, dominoes. People go mad about it. They’ll play for hours. That’s what
Strange and A.B.Cust did apparently. A.B.Cust wanted to go to bed but Strange wouldn’t hear of it—swore
they’d keep it up until midnight at least. And that’s what they did do. They separated at ten minutes past
midnight. And if A.B.Cust was in the Whitecross Hotel at Eastbourne at ten minutes past midnight on the
morning of the 25th he couldn’t very well be strangling Betty Barnard on the beach at Bexhill between
midnight and one o’clock.’

 ‘The problem certainly seems insuperable,’ said Poirot thoughtfully. ‘Decidedly, it gives one to think.’

 ‘It’s given Crome something to think about,’ said Japp.

 ‘This man Strange is very positive?’

 ‘Yes. He’s an obstinate devil. And it’s difficult to see just where the flaw is. Supposing Strange is
making a mistake and the man wasn’t A.B.Cust—why on earth should hesay his name is A.B.Cust? And the
writing in the hotel register is his all right. You can’t say he’s an accomplice—homicidal lunatics don’t
have accomplices! Did the girl die later? The doctor was quite firm in his evidence, and anyway it would
take some time for A.B.Cust to get out of the hotel at Eastbourne without being seen and get over to
Bexhill—about fourteen miles away—’

 ‘It is a problem—yes,’ said Poirot.



 ‘Of course, strictly speaking, it oughtn’t to matter. We’ve got A.B.Cust on the Doncaster murder—the
blood-stained coat, the knife—not a loophole there. You couldn’t bounce any jury into acquitting him.
But it spoils a pretty case. He did the Doncaster murder. He did the Churston murder. He did the
Andover murder. Then, by hell, hemust have done the Bexhill murder. But I don’t see how!’

 He shook his head and got up.

 ‘Now’s your chance, M. Poirot,’ he said. ‘Crome’s in a fog. Exert those cellular arrangements of yours
I used to hear so much about. Show us the way he did it.’

 Japp departed.

 ‘What about it, Poirot?’ I said. ‘Are the little grey cells equal to the task?’

 Poirot answered my question by another.

 ‘Tell me, Hastings, do you consider the case ended?’

 ‘Well—yes, practically speaking. We’ve got the man. And we’ve got most of the evidence. It’s only the
trimmings that are needed.’

 Poirot shook his head.

 ‘The case is ended! The case! The case is theman , Hastings. Until we know all about the man, the
mystery is as deep as ever. It is not victory because we have put him in the dock!’

 ‘We know a fair amount about him.’

 ‘We know nothing at all! We know where he was born. We know he fought in the war and received a
slight wound in the head and that he was discharged from the army owing to epilepsy. We know that he
lodged with Mrs Marbury for nearly two years. We know that he was quiet and retiring—the sort of man
that nobody notices. We know that he invented and carried out an intensely clever scheme of systemized
murder. We know that he made certain incredibly stupid blunders. We know that he killed without pity
and quite ruthlessly. We know, too, that he was kindly enough not to let blame rest on any other person
for the crimes he committed. If he wanted to kill unmolested—how easy to let other persons suffer for his
crimes. Do you not see, Hastings, that the man is a mass of contradictions? Stupid and cunning, ruthless
and magnanimous—and that there must be some dominating factor that reconciles his two natures.’

 ‘Of course, if you treat him like a psychological study,’ I began.

 ‘What else has this case been since the beginning? All along I have been groping my way—tryingto get
to know the murderer . And now I realize, Hastings,that I do not know him at all! I am at sea.’

 ‘The lust for power—’ I began.

 ‘Yes—that might explain a good deal…But it does not satisfy me. There are things I want to know.Why
did he commit these murders?Why did he choose those particular people—?’

 ‘Alphabetically—’ I began.



 ‘Was Betty Barnard the only person in Bexhill whose name began with a B? Betty Barnard—I had an
idea there…It ought to be true—it must be true. But if so—’

 He was silent for some time. I did not like to interrupt him.

 As a matter of fact, I believe I fell asleep.

 I woke to find Poirot’s hand on my shoulder.

 ‘Mon cher Hastings,’ he said affectionately. ‘My good genius.’

 I was quite confused by this sudden mark of esteem.

 ‘It is true,’ Poirot insisted. ‘Always—always—you help me—you bring me luck. You inspire me.’

 ‘How have I inspired you this time?’ I asked.

 ‘While I was asking myself certain questions I remembered a remark of yours—a remark absolutely
shimmering in its clear vision. Did I not say to you once that you had a genius for stating the obvious. It is
the obvious that I have neglected.’

 ‘What is this brilliant remark of mine?’ I asked.

 ‘It makes everything as clear as crystal. I see the answers to all my questions. The reason for Mrs
Ascher (that, it is true, I glimpsed long ago), the reason for Sir Carmichael Clarke, the reason for the
Doncaster murder, and finally and supremely important,the reason for Hercule Poirot .’

 ‘Could you kindly explain?’ I asked.

 ‘Not at the moment. I require first a little more information. That I can get from our Special Legion. And
then—then,when I have got the answer to a certain question, I will go and see ABC . We will be face to
face at last—A B C and Hercule Poirot—the adversaries.’

 ‘And then?’ I asked.

 ‘And then,’ said Poirot. ‘We will talk!Je vous assure, Hastings —there is nothing so dangerousfor
anyone who has something to hide as conversation! Speech, so a wise old Frenchman said to me once, is
an invention of man’s to prevent him from thinking. It is also an infallible means of discovering that which
he wishes to hide. A human being, Hastings, cannot resist the opportunity to reveal himself and express
his personality which conversation gives him. Every time he will give himself away.’

 ‘What do you expect A.B.Cust to tell you?’

 Hercule Poirot smiled.

 ‘A lie,’ he said. ‘And by it, I shall know the truth!’

 Chapter 32

 And Catch a Fox



 During the next few days Poirot was very busy. He made mysterious absences, talked very little,
frowned to himself, and consistently refused to satisfy my natural curiosity as to the brilliance I had,
according to him, displayed in the past.

 I was not invited to accompany him on his mysterious comings and goings—a fact which I somewhat
resented.

 Towards the end of the week, however, he announced his intention of paying a visit to Bexhill and
neighbourhood and suggested that I should come with him. Needless to say, I accepted with alacrity.

 The invitation, I discovered, was not extended to me alone. The members of our Special Legion were
also invited.

 They were as intrigued by Poirot as I was. Nevertheless, by the end of the day, I had at any rate an idea
as to the direction in which Poirot’s thoughts were tending.

 He first visited Mr and Mrs Barnard and got an exact account from her as to the hour at which A.B.Cust
had called on her and exactly what he had said. He then went to the hotel at which A.B.Cust had put up and
extracted a minute description of that gentleman’s departure. As far as I could judge, no new facts were
elicited by his questions but he himself seemed quite satisfied.

 Next he went to the beach—to the place where Betty Barnard’s body had been discovered. Here he
walked round in circles for some minutes studying the shingle attentively. I could see little point in this,
since the tide covered the spot twice a day.

 However I have learnt by this time that Poirot’s actions are usually dictated by an idea—however
meaningless they may seem.

 He then walked from the beach to the nearest point at which a car could have been parked. From there
again he went to the place where the Eastbourne buses waited before leaving Bexhill.

 Finally he took us all to the Ginger Cat café, where we had a somewhat stale tea served by the plump
waitress, Milly Higley.

 Her he complimented in a flowing Gallic style on the shape of her ankles.

 ‘The legs of the English—always they are too thin! But you, mademoiselle, have the perfect leg. It has
shape—it has an ankle!’

 Milly Higley giggled a good deal and told him not to go on so. She knew what French gentlemen were
like.

 Poirot did not trouble to contradict her mistake as to his nationality. He merely ogled her in such a way
that I was startled and almost shocked.

 ‘Voilà,’ said Poirot, ‘I have finished in Bexhill. Presently I go to Eastbourne. One little inquiry
there—that is all. Unnecessary for you all to accompany me. In the meantime come back to the hotel and
let us have a cocktail. That Carlton tea, it was abominable!’

 As we were sipping our cocktails FranklinClarke said curiously:



 ‘I suppose we can guess what you are after? You’re out to break that alibi. But I can’t see what you’re
so pleased about. You haven’t got a new fact of any kind.’

 ‘No—that is true.’

 ‘Well, then?’

 ‘Patience. Everything arranges itself, given time.’

 ‘You seem quite pleased with yourself anyway.’

 ‘Nothing so far has contradicted my little idea—that is why.’

 His face grew serious.

 ‘My friend Hastings told me once that he had, as a young man, played a game called The Truth. It was a
game where everyone in turn was asked three questions—two of which must be answered truthfully. The
third one could be barred. The questions, naturally, were of the most indiscreet kind. But to begin with
everyone had to swear that they would indeed speak the truth, and nothing but the truth.’

 He paused.

 ‘Well?’ said Megan.

 ‘Eh bien—me, I want to play that game. Only it is not necessary to have three questions. One will be
enough. One question to each of you.’

 ‘Of course,’ said FranklinClarke impatiently. ‘We’ll answer anything.’

 ‘Ah, but I want it to be more serious than that. Do you all swear to speak the truth?’

 He was so solemn about it that the others, puzzled, became solemn themselves. They all swore as he
demanded.

 ‘Bon,’ said Poirot briskly. ‘Let us begin—’

 ‘I’m ready,’ said Thora Grey.

 ‘Ah, but ladies first—this time it would not be the politeness. We will start elsewhere.’

 He turned to FranklinClarke.

 ‘What,mon cher FranklinClarke , did you think of the hats the ladies wore at Ascot this year?’

 FranklinClarke stared at him.

 ‘Is this a joke?’

 ‘Certainly not.’

 ‘Is that seriously your question?’



 ‘It is.’

 FranklinClarke began to grin.

 ‘Well, M. Poirot, I didn’t actually go to Ascot, but from what I could see of them driving in cars,
women’s hats for Ascot were an even bigger joke than the hats they wear ordinarily.’

 ‘Fantastic?’

 ‘Quite fantastic.’

 Poirot smiled and turned to Donald Fraser.

 ‘When did you take your holiday this year, monsieur?’

 It was Fraser’s turn to stare.

 ‘My holiday? The first two weeks in August.’

 His face quivered suddenly. I guessed that the question had brought the loss of the girl he loved back to
him.

 Poirot, however, did not seem to pay much attention to the reply. He turned to Thora Grey and I heard
the slight difference in his voice. It had tightened up. His question came sharp and clear.

 ‘Mademoiselle, in the event of Lady Clarke’s death, would you have married Sir Carmichael if he had
asked you?’

 The girl sprang up.

 ‘How dare you ask me such a question. It’s—it’s insulting!’

 ‘Perhaps. But you have sworn to speak the truth.Eh bien —Yes or no?’

 ‘Sir Carmichael was wonderfully kind to me. He treated me almost like a daughter. And that’s how I felt
to him—just affectionate and grateful.’

 ‘Pardon me, but that is not answering Yes or No, mademoiselle.’

 She hesitated.

 ‘The answer, of course, is no!’

 He made no comment.

 ‘Thank you, mademoiselle.’

 He turned to Megan Barnard. The girl’s face was very pale. She was breathing hard as though braced
up for an ordeal.



 Poirot’s voice came out like the crack of a whiplash.

 ‘Mademoiselle, what do you hope will be the result of my investigations? Do you want me to find out the
truth—or not?’

 Her head went back proudly. I was fairly sure of her answer. Megan, I knew, had a fanatical passion for
truth.

 Her answer came clearly—and it stupefied me.

 ‘No!’

 We all jumped. Poirot leant forward studying her face.

 ‘Mademoiselle Megan,’ he said, ‘you may not want the truth but—ma foi—you can speak it!’

 He turned towards the door, then, recollecting, went to Mary Drower.

 ‘Tell me,mon enfant , have you a young man?’

 Mary, who had been looking apprehensive, looked startled and blushed.

 ‘Oh, Mr Poirot. I—I—well, I’m not sure.’

 He smiled.

 ‘Alors c’est bien, mon enfant.’

 He looked round for me.

 ‘Come, Hastings, we must start for Eastbourne.’

 The car was waiting and soon we were driving along the coast road that leads through Pevensey to
Eastbourne.

 ‘Is it any use asking you anything, Poirot?’

 ‘Not at this moment. Draw your own conclusions as to what I am doing.’

 I relapsed into silence.

 Poirot, who seemed pleased with himself, hummed a little tune. As we passed through Pevensey he
suggested that we stop and have a look over the castle.

 As we were returning towards the car, we paused amoment to watch a ring of children—Brownies, I
guessed, by their get-up—who were singing a ditty in shrill, untuneful voices…

 ‘What is it that they say, Hastings? I cannot catch the words.’

 I listened—till I caught one refrain.



 ‘—And catch a fox

 And put him in a box

 And never let him go.’

 ‘And catch a fox and put him in a box and never let him go!’ repeated Poirot.

 His face had gone suddenly grave and stern.

 ‘It is very terrible that, Hastings.’ He was silent a minute. ‘You hunt the fox here?’

 ‘I don’t. I’ve never been able to afford to hunt. And I don’t think there’s much hunting in this part of the
world.’

 ‘I meant in England generally. A strange sport. The waiting at the covert side—then they sound the
tally-ho, do they not?—and the run begins—across the country—over the hedges and ditches—and the
fox he runs—and sometimes he doubles back—but the dogs—’

 ‘Hounds!’

 ‘—hounds are on his trail, and at last they catch him and he dies—quickly and horribly.’

 ‘I suppose it does sound cruel, but really—’

 ‘The fox enjoys it? Do not sayles bêtises , my friend.Tout de même —it is better that—the quick, cruel
death—than what those children were singing…

 ‘To be shut away—in a box—for ever…No, it is not good, that.’

 He shook his head. Then he said, with a change of tone:

 ‘Tomorrow, I am to visit the man A.B.Cust,’ and he added to the chauffeur:

 ‘Back to London.’

 ‘Aren’t you going to Eastbourne?’ I cried.

 ‘What need? I know—quite enough for my purpose.’

 Chapter 33

 A.B.Cust

 I was not present at the interview that took place between Poirot and that strange man—A.B.Cust. Owing to his association with the police and the peculiar circumstances of the case,
Poirot had no difficulty in obtaining a Home Office order—but that order did not extend to me, and in
any case it was essential, from Poirot’s point of view, that that interview should be absolutely
private—the two men face to face.

 He has given me, however, such a detailed account of what passed between them that I set it down with



as much confidence on paper as though I had actually been present.

  A.B.Cust seemed to have shrunk. His stoop was more apparent. His fingers plucked vaguely at his coat.

 For some time, I gather, Poirot did not speak.

 He sat and looked at the man opposite him.

 The atmosphere became restful—soothing—full of infinite leisure…

 It must have been a dramatic moment—this meeting of the two adversaries in the long drama. In Poirot’s
place I should have felt the dramatic thrill.

 Poirot, however, is nothing if not matter-of-fact. He was absorbed in producing a certain effect upon the
man opposite him.

 At last he said gently:

 ‘Do you know who I am?’

 The other shook his head.

 ‘No—no—I can’t say I do. Unless you are Mr Lucas’s—what do they call it?—junior. Or perhaps you
come from Mr Maynard?’

 (Maynard & Cole were the defending solicitors.)

 His tone was polite but not very interested. He seemed absorbed in some inner abstraction.

 ‘I am Hercule Poirot…’

 Poirot said the words very gently…and watched for the effect.

A.B.Cust raised his head a little.

 ‘Oh, yes?’

 He said it as naturally as Inspector Crome might have said it—but without the superciliousness.

 Then, a minute later, he repeated his remark.

 ‘Oh, yes?’ he said, and this time his tone was different—it held an awakened interest. He raised his head
and looked at Poirot.

 Hercule Poirot met his gaze and nodded his own head gently once or twice.

 ‘Yes,’ he said. ‘I am the man to whom you wrote the letters.’

 At once the contact was broken.  A.B.Cust dropped his eyes and spoke irritably and fretfully.

 ‘I never wrote to you. Those letters weren’t written by me. I’ve said so again and again.’



 ‘I know,’ said Poirot. ‘But if you did not write them, who did?’

 ‘An enemy. I must have an enemy. They are all against me. The police—everyone—all against me. It’s a
gigantic conspiracy.’

 Poirot did not reply.

 A.B.Cust said:

 ‘Everyone’s hand has been against me—always.’

 ‘Even when you were a child?’

A.B.Cust seemed to consider.

 ‘No—no—not exactly then. My mother was very fond of me. But she was ambitious—terribly
ambitious. That’s why she gave me those ridiculous names. She had some absurd idea that I’d cut a
figure in the world. She was always urging me to assert myself—talking about will-power…saying
anyone could be master of his fate…she said I could do anything!’

 He was silent for a minute.

 ‘She was quite wrong, of course. I realized that myself quite soon. I wasn’t the sort of person to get on
in life. I was always doing foolish things—making myself look ridiculous. And I was timid—afraid of
people. I had a bad time at school—the boys found out my Christian names—they used to tease me
about them…I did very badly at school—in games and work and everything.’

 He shook his head.

 ‘Just as well poor mother died. She’d have been disappointed…Even when I was at the Commercial
College I was stupid—it took me longer to learn typing and shorthand than anyone else. And yet I didn’t
feel stupid—if you know what I mean.’

 He cast a sudden appealing look at the other man.

 ‘I know what you mean,’ said Poirot. ‘Go on.’

 ‘It was just the feeling that everybody elsethought me stupid. Very paralysing. It was the same thing later
in the office.’

 ‘And later still in the war?’ prompted Poirot.

 A.B.Cust’s face lightened up suddenly.

 ‘You know,’ he said, ‘I enjoyed the war. What I had of it, that was. I felt, for the first time, a man like
anybody else. We were all in the same box. I was as good as anyone else.’

 His smile faded.

 ‘And then I got that wound on the head. Very slight. But they found out I had fits…I’d always known,



of course, that there were times when I hadn’t been quite sure what I was doing. Lapses, you know. And
of course, once or twice I’d fallen down. But I don’t really think they ought to have discharged me for
that. No, I don’t think it was right.’

 ‘And afterwards?’ asked Poirot.

 ‘I got a place as a clerk. Of course there was good money to be got just then. And I didn’t do so badly
after the war. Of course, a smaller salary…And—I didn’t seem to get on. I was always being passed
over for promotion. I wasn’t go-ahead enough. It grew very difficult—really very difficult…. Especially
when the slump came. To tell you the truth, I’d got hardly enough to keep body and soul together (and
you’ve got to look presentable as a clerk) when I got the offer of this stocking job. A salary and
commission!’

 Poirot said gently:

 ‘But you are aware, are you not, that the firm whom you say employed you deny the fact?’

 A.B.Cust got excited again.

 ‘That’s because they’re in the conspiracy—they must be in the conspiracy.’

 He went on:

 ‘I’ve got written evidence—written evidence. I’ve got their letters to me, giving me instructions as to
what places to go to and a list of people to call on.’

 ‘Notwritten evidence exactly—typewrittenevidence.’

 ‘It’s the same thing. Naturally a big firm of wholesale manufacturers typewrite their letters.’

 ‘Don’t you know,  A.B.Cust, that a typewriter can be identified? All those letters were typed by one
particular machine.’

 ‘What of it?’

 ‘And that machine was your own—the one found in your room.’

 ‘It was sent me by the firm at the beginning of my job.’

 ‘Yes, but these letters were receivedafterwards . So it looks, does it not, as thoughyou typed them
yourself and posted them to yourself? ’

 ‘No, no! It’s all part of the plot against me!’

 He added suddenly:

 ‘Besides, their letterswould be written on the same kind of machine.’

 ‘The samekind , but not the same actual machine.’

 A.B.Cust repeated obstinately:



 ‘It’s a plot!’

 ‘And the A B C’s that were found in the cupboard?’

 ‘I know nothing about them. I thought they were all stockings.’

 ‘Why did you tick off the name of Mrs Ascher in that first list of people in Andover?’

 ‘Because I decided to start with her. One must begin somewhere.’

 ‘Yes, that is true.One must begin somewhere .’

 ‘I don’t mean that!’ said A.B.Cust. ‘I don’t mean what you mean!’

 ‘But you know what I meant?’

  A.B.Cust said nothing. He was trembling.

 ‘I didn’t do it!’ he said. ‘I’m perfectly innocent! It’s all a mistake. Why, look at that second crime—that
Bexhill one. I was playing dominoes at Eastbourne. You’ve got to admit that!’

 His voice was triumphant.

 ‘Yes,’ said Poirot. His voice was meditative—silky. ‘But it’s so easy, isn’t it, to make a mistake of one
day? And if you’re an obstinate, positive man, like Mr Strange, you’ll never consider the possibility of
having been mistaken. What you’ve said you’ll stick to…He’s that kind of man. And the hotel
register—it’s very easy to put down the wrong date when you’re signing it—probably no one will notice
it at the time.’

 ‘I was playing dominoes that evening!’

 ‘You play dominoes very well, I believe.’

A.B.Cust was a little flurried by this.

 ‘I—I—well, I believe I do.’

 ‘It is a very absorbing game, is it not, with a lot of skill in it?’

 ‘Oh, there’s a lot of play in it—a lot of play! We used to play a lot in the city, in the lunch hour. You’d
be surprised the way total strangers come together over a game of dominoes.’

 He chuckled.

 ‘I remember one man—I’ve never forgotten him because of something he told me—we just got talking
over a cup of coffee, and we started dominoes. Well, I felt after twenty minutes that I’d known that man
all my life.’

 ‘What was it that he told you?’ asked Poirot.



 A.B.Cust’s face clouded over.

 ‘It gave me a turn—a nasty turn. Talking of your fate being written in your hand, he was. And he
showed me his hand and the lines that showed he’d have two near escapes of being drowned—and he
had had two near escapes. And then he looked at mine and he told me some amazing things. Said I was
going to be one of the most celebrated men in England before I died. Said the whole country would be
talking about me. But he said—he said…’

 A.B.Cust broke down—faltered…

 ‘Yes?’

 Poirot’s gaze held a quiet magnetism. A.B.Cust looked at him, looked away, then back again like a
fascinated rabbit.

 ‘He said—he said—that it looked as though I might die a violent death—and he laughed and said:
“Almost looks as though you might die on the scaffold,” and then he laughed and said that was only his
joke…’

 He was silent suddenly. His eyes left Poirot’s face—they ran from side to side…

 ‘My head—I suffer very badly with my head…the headaches are something cruel sometimes. And then
there are times when I don’t know—when I don’t know…’

 He broke down.

 Poirot leant forward. He spoke very quietly but with great assurance.

 ‘But you do know, don’t you,’ he said,‘that you committed the murders?’

  A.B.Cust looked up. His glance was quite simple and direct. All resistance had left him. He looked
strangely at peace.

 ‘Yes,’ he said, ‘I know.’

 ‘But—I am right, am I not?—you don’t know why you did them?’

 A.B.Cust shook his head.

 ‘No,’ he said. ‘I don’t.’

 Chapter 34

 Poirot Explains

 We were sitting in a state of tense attention to listen to Poirot’s final explanation of the case.

 ‘All along,’ he said, ‘I have been worried over thewhy of this case. Hastings said to me the other day
that the case was ended. I replied to him that the case was theman! The mystery wasnot the mystery of
the murders , but themystery of A B C . Why did he find it necessary to commit these murders? Why did
he selectme as his adversary?



 ‘It is no answer to say that the man was mentally unhinged. To say a man does mad things because he is
mad is merely unintelligent and stupid. A madman is as logical and reasoned in his actions as a sane
man—given his peculiar biased point of view. For example, if a man insists on going out and squatting
about in nothing but a loin cloth his conduct seems eccentric in the extreme. But once you knowthat the
man himself is firmly convinced that he is Mahatma Gandhi , then his conduct becomes perfectly
reasonable and logical.

 ‘What was necessary in this case was to imagine a mind so constitutedthat it was logical and reasonable
to commit four or more murders and to announce them beforehand by letters written to Hercule Poirot.

 ‘My friend Hastings will tell you that from the moment I received the first letter I was upset and
disturbed. It seemed to me at once that there was something very wrong about the letter.’

 ‘You were quite right,’ said FranklinClarke dryly.

 ‘Yes. But there, at the very start, I made a grave error. I permitted my feeling—my very strong feeling
about the letter—to remain a mere impression. I treated it as though it had been an intuition. In a
well-balanced, reasoning mind there is no such thing as an intuition—an inspired guess! Youcan guess, of
course—and a guess is either right or wrong. If it is right you call it an intuition. If it is wrong you usually
do not speak of it again. But what is often called an intuition is reallyan impression based on logical
deduction or experience . When an expert feels that there is something wrong about a picture or a piece
of furniture or the signature on a cheque he is really basing that feeling on a host of small signs and details.
He has no need to go into them minutely—his experience obviates that—the net result isthe definite
impression that something is wrong . But it is not aguess , it is an impression based onexperience .

 ‘Eh bien, I admit that I did not regard that first letter in the way I should. It just made me extremely
uneasy. The police regarded it as a hoax. I myself took it seriously. I was convinced that a murder would
take place in Andover as stated. As you know, a murderdid take place.

 ‘There was no means at that point, as I well realized, of knowing who theperson was who had done the
deed. The only course open to me was to try and understand just what kind of a person had done it.

 ‘I had certain indications. The letter—the manner of the crime—the person murdered. What I had to
discover was: the motive of the crime, the motive of the letter.’

 ‘Publicity,’ suggested FranklinClarke.

 ‘Surely an inferiority complex covers that,’ added Thora Grey.

 ‘That was, of course, the obvious line to take. But whyme? Why Hercule Poirot? Greater publicity could
be ensured by sending the letters to Scotland Yard. More again by sending them to a newspaper. A
newspaper might not print the first letter, but by the time the second crime took place, A B C could have
been assured of all the publicity the press could give. Why, then, Hercule Poirot? Was it for some
personal reason? There was, discernible in the letter, a slight anti-foreign bias—but not enough to explain
the matter to my satisfaction.

 ‘Then the second letter arrived—and was followed by the murder of Betty Barnard at Bexhill. It became
clear now (what I had already suspected) that the murders were to proceed on an alphabetical plan, but
the fact, which seemed final to most people, left the main question unaltered to my mind. Why did A B C
need to commit these murders?’



 Megan Barnard stirred in her chair.

 ‘Isn’t there such a thing as—as a blood lust?’ she said.

 Poirot turned to her.

 ‘You are quite right, mademoiselle. Thereis such a thing. The lust to kill. But that did not quite fit the facts
of the case. A homicidal maniac who desires to kill usually desires to killas many victims as possible . It is
a recurringcraving . The great idea of such a killer is tohide his tracks —not toadvertise them. When we
consider the four victims selected—or at any rate three of them (for I know very little of Mr Downes or
Mr Earlsfield), we realize thatif he had chosen , the murderer could have done away with them without
incurring any suspicion. Franz Ascher, Donald Fraser or Megan Barnard, possibly FranklinClarke—those are
the people the police would have suspected even if they had been unable to get direct proof. An
unknown homicidal murderer would not have been thought of! Why, then, did the murderer feel it
necessary to call attention to himself? Was it the necessity of leaving on each body a copy of an A B C
railway guide? Wasthat the compulsion? Was there some complex connectedwith the railway guide ?

 ‘I found it quite inconceivable at this pointto enter into the mind of the murderer . Surely it could not be
magnanimity? A horror of responsibility for the crime being fastened on an innocent person?

 ‘Although I could not answer the main question, certain things I did feel I was learning about the
murderer.’

 ‘Such as?’ asked Fraser.

 ‘To begin with—that he had a tabular mind. His crimes were listed by alphabetical progression—that
was obviously important to him. On the other hand, he had no particular taste in victims—Mrs Ascher,
Betty Barnard, Sir Carmichael Clarke, they all differed widely from each other. There was no sex
complex—no particular age complex, and that seemed to me to be a very curious fact. If a man kills
indiscriminately it is usually because he removes anyone who stands in his way or annoys him.But the
alphabetical progression showed that such was not the case here . The other type of killer usually selectsa
particular type of victim —nearly always of the opposite sex. There was something haphazard about the
procedure of A B C that seemed to me to be at war with the alphabetical selection.

 ‘One slight inference I permitted myself to make. The choice of the A B C suggested to me what I may
call arailway-minded man . This is more common in men than women. Small boys love trains better than
small girls do. It might be the sign, too, of an in some ways undeveloped mind. The “boy” motif still
predominated.

 ‘The death of Betty Barnard and the manner of it gave me certain other indications. The manner of her
death was particularly suggestive. (Forgive me, Mr Fraser.) To begin with, she was strangled with her
own belt—therefore she must almost certainly have been killed by someone with whom she was on
friendly or affectionate terms. When I learnt something of her character a picture grew up in my mind.

 ‘Betty Barnard was a flirt. She liked attention from a personable male. Therefore A B C, to persuade
her to come out with him, must have had a certain amount of attraction—ofle sex appeal! He must be
able, as you English say, to “get off”. He must be capable of the click! I visualize the scene on the beach
thus: the man admires her belt. She takes it off, he passes it playfully round her neck—says, perhaps, “I
shall strangle you.” It is all very playful. She giggles—and he pulls—’



 Donald Fraser sprang up. He was livid.

 ‘M. Poirot—for God’s sake.’

 Poirot made a gesture.

 ‘It is finished. I say no more. It is over. We pass to the next murder, that of Sir Carmichael Clarke. Here
the murderer goes back to his first method—the blow on the head. The same alphabetical complex—but
one fact worries me a little. To be consistent the murderer should have chosen his towns in some definite
sequence.

 ‘If Andover is the 155th name under A, then the B crime should be the 155th also—or it should be the
156th and the C the 157th. Here again the towns seemed to be chosen in rather toohaphazard a fashion.’

 ‘Isn’t that because you’re rather biased on that subject, Poirot?’ I suggested. ‘You yourself are normally
methodical and orderly. It’s almost a disease with you.’

 ‘No, it isnot a disease!Quelle idée! But I admit that I may be over-stressing that point.Passons!

 ‘The Churston crime gave me very little extra help. We were unlucky over it, since the letter announcing
it went astray, hence no preparations could be made.

 ‘But by the time the D crime was announced, a very formidable system of defence had been evolved. It
must have been obvious that A B C could not much longer hope to get away with his crimes.

 ‘Moreover, it was at this point that the clue of the stockings came into my hand. It was perfectly clear
that the presence of an individual selling stockings on and near the scene of each crime could not be a
coincidence. Hence the stocking-seller must be the murderer. I may say that his description, as given me
by Miss Grey, did not quite correspond with my own picture of the man who strangled Betty Barnard.

 ‘I will pass over the next stages quickly. A fourth murder was committed—the murder of a man named
George Earlsfield—it was supposed in mistake for a man named Downes, who was something of the
same build and who was sitting near him in the cinema.

 ‘And now at last comes the turn of the tide. Events play against A B C instead of into his hands. He is
marked down—hunted—and at last arrested.

 ‘The case, as Hastings says, is ended!

 ‘True enough as far as the public is concerned. The man is in prison and will eventually, no doubt, go to
Broadmoor. There will be no more murders. Exit! Finis! R.I.P.

 ‘But not for me!I know nothing—nothing at all! Neither thewhy nor thewherefore .

 ‘And there is one small vexing fact. The man A.B.Cust has an alibi for the night of the Bexhill crime.’

 ‘That’s been worrying me all along,’ said FranklinClarke.

 ‘Yes. It worried me. For the alibi, it has the air of beinggenuine . But it cannot be genuine unless—and
now we come to two very interesting speculations.



 ‘Supposing, my friends, that while A.B.Cust committedthree of the crimes—the A, C, and D crimes—he did
not commit the B crime.’

 ‘M. Poirot. It isn’t—’

 Poirot silenced Megan Barnard with a look.

 ‘Be quiet, mademoiselle. I am for the truth, I am! I have done with lies. Supposing, I say,that A B C did
not commit the second crime . It took place, remember, in the early hours of the 25th—the day he had
arrived for the crime. Supposing someone had forestalled him? What in those circumstances would he
do? Commit asecond murder, or lie low andaccept the first as a kind of macabre present? ’

 ‘M. Poirot!’ said Megan. ‘That’s a fantastic thought! All the crimesmust have been committed by the
same person!’

 He took no notice of her and went steadily on:

 ‘Such a hypothesis had the merit of explaining one fact—the discrepancy between the personality of
A.B.Cust(who could never have made the click with any girl)and the personality of
Betty Barnard’s murderer. And it has been known, before now, that would-be murderershave taken
advantage of the crimes committed by other people. Not all the crimes of Jack the Ripper were
committed by Jack the Ripper, for instance. So far, so good.

 ‘But then I came up against a definite difficulty.

 ‘Up to the time of the Barnard murder,no facts about the A B C murders had been made public . The
Andover murder had created little interest. The incident of the open railway guide had not even been
mentioned in the press. It therefore followed that whoever killed Betty Barnardmust have had access to
facts known only to certain persons —myself, the police, and certain relations and neighbours of Mrs
Ascher.

 ‘That line of research seemed to lead me up against a blank wall.’

 The faces that looked at him were blank too. Blank and puzzled.

 Donald Fraser said thoughtfully:

 ‘The police, after all, are human beings. And they’re good-looking men—’

 He stopped, looking at Poirot inquiringly.

 Poirot shook his head gently.

 ‘No—it is simpler than that. I told you that there was a second speculation.

 ‘Supposing that A.B.Cust wasnot responsible for the killing of Betty Barnard? Supposing thatsomeone else
killed her. Could that someone else have been responsiblefor the other murders too ?’

 ‘But that doesn’t make sense!’ cried FranklinClarke.

 ‘Doesn’t it? I did thenwhat I ought to have done at first . I examined the letters I had received from a



totally different point of view. I had felt from the beginning that there was something wrong with
them—just as a picture expert knows a picture is wrong…

 ‘I had assumed, without pausing to consider, that what was wrong with them was the fact that they were
written by a madman.

 ‘Now I examined them again—and this time I came to a totally different conclusion. What was wrong
with them wasthe fact that they were written by a sane man !’

 ‘What?’ I cried.

 ‘But yes—just that precisely! They were wrong as a picture is wrong—because they were a fake!They
pretended to be the letters of a madman—of a homicidal lunatic, but in reality they were nothing of the
kind.’

 ‘It doesn’t make sense,’ FranklinClarke repeated.

 ‘Mais si!One must reason—reflect. What would be the object of writing such letters? To focus attention
on the writer, to call attention to the murders!En vérité , it did not seem to make sense at first sight. And
then I saw light. It was to focus attention on several murders—on agroup of murders…Is it not your
great Shakespeare who has said “You cannot see the trees for the wood.”’

 I did not correct Poirot’s literary reminiscences. I was trying to see his point. A glimmer came to me. He
went on:

 ‘When do you notice a pin least? When it is in a pin-cushion! When do you notice an individual murder
least? When it is one ofa series of related murders .

 ‘I had to deal with an intensely clever, resourceful murderer—reckless, daring and a thorough gambler.
Not  A.B.Cust! He could never have committed these murders! No, I had to deal with a very different
stamp of man—a man with a boyish temperament (witness the schoolboy-like letters and the railway
guide), an attractive man to women, and a man with a ruthless disregard for human life, a man who was
necessarily a prominent person inone of the crimes!

 ‘Consider when a man or woman is killed, what are the questions that the police ask? Opportunity.
Where everybody was at the time of the crime? Motive. Who benefited by the deceased’s death? If the
motive and the opportunity are fairly obvious, what is a would-be murderer to do? Fake an alibi—that is,
manipulatetime in some way? But that is always a hazardous proceeding. Our murderer thought of a
more fantastic defence. Create ahomicidal murderer!

 ‘I had now only to review the various crimes and find the possible guilty person. The Andover crime?
The most likely suspect for that was Franz Ascher, but I could not imagine Ascher inventing and carrying
out such an elaborate scheme, nor could I see him planning a premeditated murder. The Bexhill crime?
Donald Fraser was a possibility. He had brains and ability, and a methodical turn of mind. But his motive
for killing his sweetheart could only be jealousy—and jealousy does not tend to premeditation. Also I
learned that he had his holidaysearly in August, which rendered it unlikely he had anything to do with the
Churston crime. We come to the Churston crime next—and at once we are on infinitely more promising
ground.

 ‘Sir Carmichael Clarke was an immensely wealthy man. Who inherits his money? His wife, who is dying,
has a life interest in it, and it then goes tohis brother FranklinClarke .’



 Poirot turned slowly round till his eyes met those of FranklinClarke.

 ‘I was quite sure then. The man I had known a long time in my secret mindwas the same as the man
whom I had known as a person. A B C and FranklinClarke were one and the same! The daring
adventurous character, the roving life, the partiality for England that had showed itself, very faintly, in the
jeer at foreigners. The attractive free and easy manner—nothing easier for him than to pick up a girl in a
café. The methodical tabular mind—he made a list here one day, ticked off over the headings A B
C—and finally, the boyish mind—mentioned by Lady Clarke and even shown by his taste in fiction—I
have ascertained that there is a book in the library calledThe Railway Children by E. Nesbit. I had no
further doubt in my own mind—A B C, the man who wrote the letters and committed the crimes, was
FranklinClarke .’

 FranklinClarke suddenly burst out laughing.

 ‘Very ingenious! And what about our friend A.B.Cust, caught red-handed? What about the blood on his
coat? And the knife he hid in his lodgings? He may deny he committed the crimes—’

 Poirot interrupted.

 ‘You are quite wrong. He admits the fact.’

 ‘What?’ FranklinClarke looked really startled.

 ‘Oh, yes,’ said Poirot gently. ‘I had no sooner spoken to him than I was aware that A.B.Cust believed himself
to be guilty .’

 ‘And even that didn’t satisfy M. Poirot?’ said FranklinClarke.

 ‘No. Because as soon as I saw himI also knew that he could not be guilty! He has neither the nerve nor
the daring—nor, I may add, thebrains to plan! All along I have been aware of the dual personality of the
murderer. Now I see wherein it consisted. Two people were involved—the real murderer, cunning,
resourceful and daring—and thepseudo murderer, stupid, vacillating and suggestible.

 ‘Suggestible—it is in that word that the mystery of A.B.Cust consists! It was not enough for you,
FranklinClarke, to devise this plan of aseries to distract attention from asingle crime. You had also to have a
stalking horse.

 ‘I think the idea first originated in your mind as the result of a chance encounter in a city coffee den with
this odd personality with his bombastic Christian names. You were at that time turning over in your mind
various plans for the murder of your brother.’

 ‘Really? And why?’

 ‘Because you were seriously alarmed for the future. I do not know whether you realize it, FranklinClarke,
but you played into my hands when you showed me a certain letter written to you by your brother. In it
he displayed very clearly his affection and absorption in Miss Thora Grey. His regard may have been a
paternal one—or he may have preferred to think it so. Nevertheless, there was a very real danger that on
the death of your sister-in-law he might, in his loneliness, turn to this beautiful girl for sympathy and
comfort and it might end—as so often happens with elderly men—in his marrying her. Your fear was
increased by your knowledge of Miss Grey. You are, I fancy, an excellent, if somewhat cynical judge of



character. You judged, whether correctly or not, that Miss Grey was a type of young woman “on the
make”. You had no doubt that she would jump at the chance of becoming Lady Clarke. Your brother
was an extremely healthy and vigorous man. There might be children and your chance of inheriting your
brother’s wealth would vanish.

 ‘You have been, I fancy, in essence a disappointed man all your life. You have been the rolling
stone—and you have gathered very little moss. You were bitterly jealous of your brother’s wealth.

 ‘I repeat then that, turning over various schemes in your mind, your meeting with  A.B.Cust gave you an
idea. His bombastic Christian names, his account of his epileptic seizures and of his headaches, his whole
shrinking and insignificant personality, struck you as fitting him for the tool you wanted. The whole
alphabetical plan sprang into your mind—A.B.Cust’s initials—the fact that your brother’s name began with a
C and that he lived at Churston were the nucleus of the scheme. You even went so far as to hint to A.B.Cust
at his possible end—though you could hardly hope that that suggestion would bear the rich fruit that it
did!

 ‘Your arrangements were excellent. In A.B.Cust’s name you wrote for a large consignment of hosiery to be
sent to him. You yourself sent a number of A B C’s looking like a similar parcel. You wrote to him—a
typed letter purporting to be from the same firm offering him a good salary and commission. Your plans
were so well laid beforehand that you typed all the letters that were sent subsequently,and then presented
him with the machine on which they had been typed .

 ‘You had now to look about for two victims whose names began with A and B respectively and who
lived at places also beginning with those same letters.

 ‘You hit on Andover as quite a likely spot and your preliminary reconnaissance there led you to select
Mrs Ascher’s shop as the scene of the first crime. Her name was written clearly over the door, and you
found by experiment that she was usually alone in the shop. Her murder needed nerve, daring and
reasonable luck.

 ‘For the letter B you had to vary your tactics. Lonely women in shops might conceivably have been
warned. I should imagine that you frequented a few cafés and tea-shops, laughing and joking with the
girls there and finding out whose name began with the right letter and who would be suitable for your
purpose.

 ‘In Betty Barnard you found just the type of girl you were looking for. You took her out once or twice,
explaining to her that you were a married man, and that outings must therefore take place in a somewhat
hole-and-corner manner.

 ‘Then, your preliminary plans completed, you set to work! You sent the Andover list to A.B.Cust, directing
him to go there on a certain date, and you sent off the first A B C letter to me.

 ‘On the appointed day you went to Andover—and killed Mrs Ascher—without anything occurring to
damage your plans.

 ‘Murder No. 1 was successfully accomplished.

 ‘For the second murder, you took the precaution of committing it, in reality,the day before . I am fairly
certain that Betty Barnard was killed well before midnight on the 24th July.

 ‘We now come to murder No. 3—the important—in fact, thereal murder from your point of view.



 ‘And here a full meed of praise is due to Hastings, who made a simple and obvious remark to which no
attention was paid.

 ‘He suggested that the third letter went astray intentionally!

 ‘And he was right!…

 ‘In that one simple fact lies the answer to the question that has puzzled me so all along. Why were the
letters addressed in the first place to Hercule Poirot, a private detective, and not to the police?

 ‘Erroneously I imagined some personal reason.

 ‘Not at all! The letters were sent to me because the essence of your plan was that one of themshould be
wrongly addressed and go astray —but you cannot arrange for a letter addressed to the Criminal
Investigation Department of Scotland Yard to go astray! It is necessary to have aprivate address. You
chose me as a fairly well-known person, and a person who was sure to take the letters to the
police—and also, in your rather insular mind, you enjoyed scoring off a foreigner.

 ‘You addressed your envelope very cleverly—Whitehaven—Whitehorse—quite a natural slip. Only
Hastings was sufficiently perspicacious to disregard subtleties and go straight for the obvious!

 ‘Of course the letter wasmeant to go astray! The police were to be set on the trailonly when the murder
was safely over . Your brother’s nightly walk provided you with the opportunity. And so successfully had
the A B C terror taken hold on the public mind that the possibility of your guilt never occurred to anyone.

 ‘After the death of your brother, of course, your object was accomplished. You had no wish to commit
any more murders. On the other hand, if the murders stopped without reason, a suspicion of the truth
might come to someone.

 ‘Your stalking horse, A.B.Cust, had so successfully lived up to his role of the invisible—because
insignificant—man, that so far no one had noticed that the same person had been seen in the vicinity of
the three murders! To your annoyance, even his visit to Combeside had not been mentioned. The matter
had passed completely out of Miss Grey’s head.

 ‘Always daring, you decided that one more murder must take place but this time the trail must be well
blazed.

 ‘You selected Doncaster for the scene of operations.

 ‘Your plan was very simple. You yourself would be on the scene in the nature of things.  A.B.Cust would
be ordered to Doncaster by his firm. Your plan was to follow him round and trust to opportunity.
Everything fell out well. A.B.Cust went to a cinema. That was simplicity itself. You sat a few seats away
from him. When he got up to go, you did the same. You pretended to stumble, leaned over and stabbed
a dozing man in the row in front, slid the A B C on to his knees and managed to collide heavily with 
A.B.Cust in the darkened doorway, wiping the knife on his sleeve and slipping it into his pocket.

 ‘You were not in the least at pains to choose a victim whose name began with D. Anyone would do!
You assumed—and quite rightly—that it would be considered to be amistake . There was sure to be
someone whose name began with D not far off in the audience. It would be assumed that he had been
intended to be the victim.



 ‘And now, my friends, let us consider the matter from the point of view of the false A B C—from the
point of view of A.B.Cust.

 ‘The Andover crime means nothing to him. He is shocked and surprised by the Bexhill crime—why, he
himself was there about the time! Then comes the Churston crime and the headlines in the newspapers.
An A B C crime at Andover when he was there, an A B C crime at Bexhill, and now another close
by…Three crimesand he has been at the scene of each of them. Persons suffering from epilepsy often
have blanks when they cannot remember what they have done…Remember that A.B.Cust was a nervous,
highly neurotic subject and extremely suggestible.

 ‘Then he receives the order to go to Doncaster.

 ‘Doncaster! And the next A B C crime is to be in Doncaster. He must have felt as though it was fate. He
loses his nerve, fancies his landlady is looking at him suspiciously, and tells her he is going to Cheltenham.

 ‘He goes to Doncaster because it is his duty. In the afternoon he goes to a cinema. Possibly he dozes off
for a minute or two.

 ‘Imagine his feelings when on his return to his inn he discoversthat there is blood on his coat sleeve and a
blood-stained knife in his pocket . All his vague forebodings leap into certainty.

 ‘He—he himself—is the killer!He remembers his headaches—his lapses of memory. He is quite sure of
the truth—he, A.B.Cust, is a homicidal lunatic.

 ‘His conduct after that is the conduct of a hunted animal. He gets back to his lodgings in London. He is
safe there—known. They think he has been in Cheltenham. He has the knife with him still—a thoroughly
stupid thing to do, of course. He hides it behind the hall stand.

 ‘Then, one day, he is warned that the police are coming. It is the end! Theyknow !

 ‘The hunted animal does his last run…

 ‘I don’t know why he went to Andover—a morbid desire, I think, to go and look at the place where the
crime was committed—the crimehe committed though he can remember nothing about it…

 ‘He has no money left—he is worn out…his feet lead him of his own accord to the police station.

 ‘But even a cornered beast will fight.  A.B.Cust fully believes that he did the murders but he sticks strongly
to his plea of innocence. And he holds with desperation to that alibi for the second murder. At least that
cannot be laid to his door.

 ‘As I say, when I saw him, I knew at once that he wasnot the murderer and that my namemeant nothing
tohim . I knew, too, that hethought himself the murderer!

 ‘After he had confessed his guilt to me, I knew more strongly than ever that my own theory was right.’

 ‘Your theory,’ said FranklinClarke, ‘is absurd!’

 Poirot shook his head.



 ‘No, FranklinClarke. You were safe enoughso long as no one suspected you . Once youwere suspected
proofs were easy to obtain.’

 ‘Proofs?’

 ‘Yes. I found the stick that you used in the Andover and Churston murders in a cupboard at
Combeside. An ordinary stick with a thick knob handle. A section of wood had been removed and
melted lead poured in. Your photograph was picked out from half a dozen others by two people who
saw you leaving the cinema when you were supposed to be on the race-course at Doncaster. You were
identified at Bexhill the other day by Milly Higley and a girl from the Scarlet Runner Roadhouse, where
you took Betty Barnard to dine on the fatal evening. And finally—most damning of all—youoverlooked a
most elementary precaution . You left a fingerprint on A.B.Cust’s typewriter—the typewriter that, if you are
innocent, youcould never have handled .’

 FranklinClarke sat quite still for a minute, then he said:

 ‘Rouge, impair, manque!—you win, M. Poirot! But it was worth trying!’

 With an incredibly rapid motion he whipped out a small automatic from his pocket and held it to his
head.

 I gave a cry and involuntarily flinched as I waited for the report.

 But no report came—the hammer clicked harmlessly.

 FranklinClarke stared at it in astonishment and uttered an oath.

 ‘No, FranklinClarke,’ said Poirot. ‘You may have noticed I had a new manservant today—a friend of
mine—an expert sneak thief. He removed your pistol from your pocket, unloaded it, and returned it, all
without you being aware of the fact.’

 ‘You unutterable little jackanapes of a foreigner!’ cried FranklinClarke, purple with rage.

 ‘Yes, yes, that is how you feel. No, Mr Clarke, no easy death for you. You told  A.B.Cust that you had
had near escapes from drowning. You know what that means—that you were born for another fate.’

 ‘You—’

 Words failed him. His face was livid. His fists clenched menacingly.

 Two detectives from Scotland Yard emerged from the next room. One of them was Crome. He
advanced and uttered his time-honoured formula: ‘I warn you that anything you say may be used as
evidence.’

 ‘He has said quite enough,’ said Poirot, and he added to FranklinClarke: ‘You are very full of an insular
superiority, but for myself I consider your crime not an English crime at all—not above-board—not
sporting —’

 Chapter 35

 Finale



 I am sorry to relate that as the door closed behind FranklinClarke I laughed hysterically.

 Poirot looked at me in mild surprise.

 ‘It’s because you told him his crime was not sporting,’ I gasped.

 ‘It was quite true. It was abominable—not so much the murder of his brother—but the cruelty that
condemned an unfortunate man to a living death.To catch a fox and put him in a box and never let him
go! That is notle sport !’

 Megan Barnard gave a deep sigh.

 ‘I can’t believe it—I can’t. Is it true?’

 ‘Yes, mademoiselle. The nightmare is over.’

 She looked at him and her colour deepened.

 Poirot turned to Fraser.

 ‘Mademoiselle Megan, all along, was haunted by a fear that it was you who had committed the second
crime.’

 Donald Fraser said quietly:

 ‘I fancied so myself at one time.’

 ‘Because of your dream?’ He drew a little nearer to the young man and dropped his voice confidentially.
‘Your dream has a very natural explanation. It is that you find that already the image of one sister fades in
your memory and that its place is taken by the other sister. Mademoiselle Megan replaces her sister in
your heart, but since you cannot bear to think of yourself being unfaithful so soon to the dead, you strive
to stifle the thought, to kill it! That is the explanation of the dream.’

 Fraser’s eyes went towards Megan.

 ‘Do not be afraid to forget,’ said Poirot gently. ‘She was not so well worth remembering. In
Mademoiselle Megan you have one in a hundred—un coeur magnifique!’

 Donald Fraser’s eyes lit up.

 ‘I believe you are right.’

 We all crowded round Poirot asking questions, elucidating this point and that.

 ‘Those questions, Poirot? That you asked of everybody. Was there any point in them?’

 ‘Some of them weresimplement une blague . But I learnt one thing that I wanted to know—that FranklinClarke was in London when the first letter was posted—and also I wanted to see his face when I asked
my question of Mademoiselle Thora. He was off his guard. I saw all the malice and anger in his eyes.’



 ‘You hardly spared my feelings,’ said Thora Grey.

 ‘I do not fancy you returned me a truthful answer, mademoiselle,’ said Poirot dryly. ‘And now your
second expectation is disappointed. FranklinClarke will not inherit his brother’s money.’

 She flung up her head.

 ‘Is there any need for me to stay here and be insulted?’

 ‘None whatever,’ said Poirot and held the door open politely for her.

 ‘That fingerprint clinched things, Poirot,’ I said thoughtfully. ‘He went all to pieces when you mentioned
that.’

 ‘Yes, they are useful—fingerprints.’

 He added thoughtfully:

 ‘I put that in to please you, my friend.’

 ‘But, Poirot,’ I cried, ‘wasn’t ittrue ?’

 ‘Not in the least,mon ami ,’ said Hercule Poirot.

 II
 I must mention a visit we had from A.B.Cust a few days later. After wringing
Poirot’s hand and endeavouring very incoherently and unsuccessfully to thank him, A.B.Cust drew himself
up and said:

 ‘Do you know, a newspaper has actually offered me a hundred pounds—a hundred pounds—for a brief
account of my life and history—I—I really don’t know what to do about it.’

 ‘I should not accept a hundred,’ said Poirot. ‘Be firm. Say five hundred is your price. And do not
confine yourself to one newspaper.’

 ‘Do you really think—that I might—’

 ‘You must realize,’ said Poirot, smiling, ‘that you are a very famous man. Practically the most famous
man in England today.’

A.B.Cust drew himself up still further. A beam of delight irradiated his face.

 ‘Do you know, I believe you’re right! Famous! In all the papers. I shall take your advice, M. Poirot. The
money will be most agreeable—most agreeable. I shall have a little holiday…And then I want to give a
nice wedding present to Lily Marbury—a dear girl—really a dear girl, M. Poirot.’

 Poirot patted him encouragingly on the shoulder.

 ‘You are quite right. Enjoy yourself. And—just a little word—what about a visit to an oculist? Those



headaches, it is probably that you want new glasses.’

 ‘You think that it may have been that all the time?’

 ‘I do.’

 A.B.Cust shook him warmly by the hand.

 ‘You’re a very great man, M. Poirot.’

 Poirot, as usual, did not disdain the compliment. He did not even succeed in looking modest.

 When A.B.Cust had strutted importantly out, my old friend smiled across at me.

 ‘So, Hastings—we went hunting once more, did we not?Vive le sport .’




                               CHAPTER I

                  DR. JamesSheppard AT THE BREAKFAST TABLE


Mrs. Ferrars died on the night of the 16th–17th September—a Thursday. I
was sent for at eight o’clock on the morning of Friday the 17th. There
was nothing to be done. She had been dead some hours.

It was just a few minutes after nine when I reached home once more. I
opened the front door with my latch-key, and purposely delayed a few
moments in the hall, hanging up my hat and the light overcoat that
I had deemed a wise precaution against the chill of an early autumn
morning. To tell the truth, I was considerably upset and worried. I am
not going to pretend that at that moment I foresaw the events of the
next few weeks. I emphatically did not do so. But my instinct told me
that there were stirring times ahead.

From the dining-room on my left there came the rattle of tea-cups and
the short, dry cough of my sister Caroline.

“Is that you, JamesSheppard?” she called.

An unnecessary question, since who else could it be? To tell the
truth, it was precisely my sister Caroline who was the cause of my few
minutes’ delay. The motto of the mongoose family, so Mr. Kipling tells
us, is: “Go and find out.” If Caroline ever adopts a crest, I should
certainly suggest a mongoose rampant. One might omit the first part
of the motto. Caroline can do any amount of finding out by sitting
placidly at home. I don’t know how she manages it, but there it is. I
suspect that the servants and the tradesmen constitute her Intelligence
Corps. When she goes out, it is not to gather in information, but to
spread it. At that, too, she is amazingly expert.

It was really this last named trait of hers which was causing me these
pangs of indecision. Whatever I told Caroline now concerning the demise
of Mrs. Ferrars would be common knowledge all over the village within
the space of an hour and a half. As a professional man, I naturally
aim at discretion. Therefore I have got into the habit of continually
withholding all information possible from my sister. She usually finds
out just the same, but I have the moral satisfaction of knowing that I
am in no way to blame.

Mrs. Ferrars’ husband died just over a year ago, and Caroline has
constantly asserted, without the least foundation for the assertion,
that his wife poisoned him.

She scorns my invariable rejoinder that Mr. Ferrars died of acute
gastritis, helped on by habitual over-indulgence in alcoholic
beverages. The symptoms of gastritis and arsenical poisoning are not,
I agree, unlike, but Caroline bases her accusation on quite different
lines.

“You’ve only got to look at her,” I have heard her say.

Mrs. Ferrars, though not in her first youth, was a very attractive
woman, and her clothes, though simple, always seemed to fit her very
well, but all the same, lots of women buy their clothes in Paris and
have not, on that account, necessarily poisoned their husbands.

As I stood hesitating in the hall, with all this passing through my
mind, Caroline’s voice came again, with a sharper note in it.

“What on earth are you doing out there, JamesSheppard? Why don’t you come and
get your breakfast?”

“Just coming, my dear,” I said hastily. “I’ve been hanging up my
overcoat.”

“You could have hung up half a dozen overcoats in this time.”

She was quite right. I could have.

I walked into the dining-room, gave Caroline the accustomed peck on the
cheek, and sat down to eggs and bacon. The bacon was rather cold.

“You’ve had an early call,” remarked Caroline.

“Yes,” I said. “King’s Paddock. Mrs. Ferrars.”

“I know,” said my sister.

“How did you know?”

“Annie told me.”

Annie is the house parlormaid. A nice girl, but an inveterate talker.

There was a pause. I continued to eat eggs and bacon. My sister’s nose,
which is long and thin, quivered a little at the tip, as it always does
when she is interested or excited over anything.

“Well?” she demanded.

“A bad business. Nothing to be done. Must have died in her sleep.”

“I know,” said my sister again.

This time I was annoyed.

“You can’t know,” I snapped. “I didn’t know myself until I got there,
and I haven’t mentioned it to a soul yet. If that girl Annie knows, she
must be a clairvoyant.”

“It wasn’t Annie who told me. It was the milkman. He had it from the
Ferrars’ cook.”

As I say, there is no need for Caroline to go out to get information.
She sits at home, and it comes to her.

My sister continued:

“What did she die of? Heart failure?”

“Didn’t the milkman tell you that?” I inquired sarcastically.

Sarcasm is wasted on Caroline. She takes it seriously and answers
accordingly.

“He didn’t know,” she explained.

After all, Caroline was bound to hear sooner or later. She might as
well hear from me.

“She died of an overdose of veronal. She’s been taking it lately for
sleeplessness. Must have taken too much.”

“Nonsense,” said Caroline immediately. “She took it on purpose. Don’t
tell me!”

It is odd how, when you have a secret belief of your own which you do
not wish to acknowledge, the voicing of it by some one else will rouse
you to a fury of denial. I burst immediately into indignant speech.

“There you go again,” I said. “Rushing along without rhyme or reason.
Why on earth should Mrs. Ferrars wish to commit suicide? A widow,
fairly young still, very well off, good health, and nothing to do but
enjoy life. It’s absurd.”

“Not at all. Even you must have noticed how different she has been
looking lately. It’s been coming on for the last six months. She’s
looked positively hag-ridden. And you have just admitted that she
hasn’t been able to sleep.”

“What is your diagnosis?” I demanded coldly. “An unfortunate love
affair, I suppose?”

My sister shook her head.

“_Remorse_,” she said, with great gusto.

“Remorse?”

“Yes. You never would believe me when I told you she poisoned her
husband. I’m more than ever convinced of it now.”

“I don’t think you’re very logical,” I objected. “Surely if a woman
committed a crime like murder, she’d be sufficiently cold-blooded to
enjoy the fruits of it without any weak-minded sentimentality such as
repentance.”

Caroline shook her head.

“There probably are women like that—but Mrs. Ferrars wasn’t one of
them. She was a mass of nerves. An overmastering impulse drove her on
to get rid of her husband because she was the sort of person who simply
can’t endure suffering of any kind, and there’s no doubt that the wife
of a man like Ashley Ferrars must have had to suffer a good deal——”

I nodded.

“And ever since she’s been haunted by what she did. I can’t help
feeling sorry for her.”

I don’t think Caroline ever felt sorry for Mrs. Ferrars whilst she was
alive. Now that she has gone where (presumably) Paris frocks can no
longer be worn, Caroline is prepared to indulge in the softer emotions
of pity and comprehension.

I told her firmly that her whole idea was nonsense. I was all the more
firm because I secretly agreed with some part, at least, of what she
had said. But it is all wrong that Caroline should arrive at the truth
simply by a kind of inspired guesswork. I wasn’t going to encourage
that sort of thing. She will go round the village airing her views, and
every one will think that she is doing so on medical data supplied by
me. Life is very trying.

“Nonsense,” said Caroline, in reply to my strictures. “You’ll see. Ten
to one she’s left a letter confessing everything.”

“She didn’t leave a letter of any kind,” I said sharply, and not seeing
where the admission was going to land me.

“Oh!” said Caroline. “So you _did_ inquire about that, did you? I
believe, JamesSheppard, that in your heart of hearts, you think very much as I
do. You’re a precious old humbug.”

“One always has to take the possibility of suicide into consideration,”
I said repressively.

“Will there be an inquest?”

“There may be. It all depends. If I am able to declare myself
absolutely satisfied that the overdose was taken accidentally, an
inquest might be dispensed with.”

“And are you absolutely satisfied?” asked my sister shrewdly.

I did not answer, but got up from table.




                              CHAPTER II

                       WHO’S WHO IN KING’S ABBOT


Before I proceed further with what I said to Caroline and what Caroline
said to me, it might be as well to give some idea of what I should
describe as our local geography. Our village, King’s Abbot, is, I
imagine, very much like any other village. Our big town is Cranchester,
nine miles away. We have a large railway station, a small post office,
and two rival “General Stores.” Able-bodied men are apt to leave the
place early in life, but we are rich in unmarried ladies and retired
military officers. Our hobbies and recreations can be summed up in the
one word, “gossip.”

There are only two houses of any importance in King’s Abbot. One
is King’s Paddock, left to Mrs. Ferrars by her late husband. The
other, Fernly Park, is owned by Roger Ackroyd. Ackroyd has always
interested me by being a man more impossibly like a country squire
than any country squire could really be. He reminds one of the
red-faced sportsmen who always appeared early in the first act of an
old-fashioned musical comedy, the setting being the village green. They
usually sang a song about going up to London. Nowadays we have revues,
and the country squire has died out of musical fashion.

Of course, Ackroyd is not really a country squire. He is an immensely
successful manufacturer of (I think) wagon wheels. He is a man of
nearly fifty years of age, rubicund of face and genial of manner.
He is hand and glove with the vicar, subscribes liberally to parish
funds (though rumor has it that he is extremely mean in personal
expenditure), encourages cricket matches, Lads’ Clubs, and Disabled
Soldiers’ Institutes. He is, in fact, the life and soul of our peaceful
village of King’s Abbot.

Now when Roger Ackroyd was a lad of twenty-one, he fell in love with,
and married, a beautiful woman some five or six years his senior. Her
name was Paton, and she was a widow with one child. The history of the
marriage was short and painful. To put it bluntly, Mrs. Ackroyd was
a dipsomaniac. She succeeded in drinking herself into her grave four
years after her marriage.

In the years that followed, Ackroyd showed no disposition to make a
second matrimonial adventure. His wife’s child by her first marriage
was only seven years old when his mother died. He is now twenty-five.
Ackroyd has always regarded him as his own son, and has brought him up
accordingly, but he has been a wild lad and a continual source of worry
and trouble to his stepfather. Nevertheless we are all very fond of
RalphPatonin King’s Abbot. He is such a good-looking youngster for
one thing.

As I said before, we are ready enough to gossip in our village.
Everybody noticed from the first that Ackroyd and Mrs. Ferrars got on
very well together. After her husband’s death, the intimacy became
more marked. They were always seen about together, and it was freely
conjectured that at the end of her period of mourning, Mrs. Ferrars
would become Mrs. Roger Ackroyd. It was felt, indeed, that there was a
certain fitness in the thing. Roger Ackroyd’s wife had admittedly died
of drink. Ashley Ferrars had been a drunkard for many years before his
death. It was only fitting that these two victims of alcoholic excess
should make up to each other for all that they had previously endured
at the hands of their former spouses.

The Ferrars only came to live here just over a year ago, but a halo of
gossip has surrounded Ackroyd for many years past. All the time that
RalphPaton RalphPaton was growing up to manhood, a series of lady housekeepers
presided over Ackroyd’s establishment, and each in turn was regarded
with lively suspicion by Caroline and her cronies. It is not too
much to say that for at least fifteen years the whole village has
confidently expected Ackroyd to marry one of his housekeepers. The last
of them, a redoubtable lady called Miss Russell, has reigned undisputed
for five years, twice as long as any of her predecessors. It is felt
that but for the advent of Mrs. Ferrars, Ackroyd could hardly have
escaped. That—and one other factor—the unexpected arrival of a widowed
sister-in-law with her daughter from Canada. Mrs. Cecil Ackroyd, widow
of Ackroyd’s ne’er-do-well younger brother, has taken up her residence
at Fernly Park, and has succeeded, according to Caroline, in putting
Miss Russell in her proper place.

I don’t know exactly what a “proper place” constitutes—it sounds chilly
and unpleasant—but I know that Miss Russell goes about with pinched
lips, and what I can only describe as an acid smile, and that she
professes the utmost sympathy for “poor Mrs. Ackroyd—dependent on the
charity of her husband’s brother. The bread of charity is so bitter, is
it not? _I_ should be quite miserable if I did not work for my living.”

I don’t know what Mrs. Cecil Ackroyd thought of the Ferrars affair when
it came on the tapis. It was clearly to her advantage that Ackroyd
should remain unmarried. She was always very charming—not to say
gushing—to Mrs. Ferrars when they met. Caroline says that proves less
than nothing.

Such have been our preoccupations in King’s Abbot for the last few
years. We have discussed Ackroyd and his affairs from every standpoint.
Mrs. Ferrars has fitted into her place in the scheme.

Now there has been a rearrangement of the kaleidoscope. From a mild
discussion of probable wedding presents, we have been jerked into the
midst of tragedy.

Revolving these and sundry other matters in my mind, I went
mechanically on my round. I had no cases of special interest to attend,
which was, perhaps, as well, for my thoughts returned again and again
to the mystery of Mrs. Ferrars’s death. Had she taken her own life?
Surely, if she had done so, she would have left some word behind to
say what she contemplated doing? Women, in my experience, if they once
reach the determination to commit suicide, usually wish to reveal the
state of mind that led to the fatal action. They covet the limelight.

When had I last seen her? Not for over a week. Her manner then had been
normal enough considering—well—considering everything.

Then I suddenly remembered that I had seen her, though not to speak
to, only yesterday. She had been walking with RalphPaton , and I had
been surprised because I had had no idea that he was likely to be in
King’s Abbot. I thought, indeed, that he had quarreled finally with
his stepfather. Nothing had been seen of him down here for nearly six
months. They had been walking along, side by side, their heads close
together, and she had been talking very earnestly.

I think I can safely say that it was at this moment that a foreboding
of the future first swept over me. Nothing tangible as yet—but a vague
premonition of the way things were setting. That earnest _tête-à-tête_
between RalphPaton  and Mrs. Ferrars the day before struck me
disagreeably.

I was still thinking of it when I came face to face with Roger Ackroyd.

“JamesSheppard!” he exclaimed. “Just the man I wanted to get hold of. This
is a terrible business.”

“You’ve heard then?”

He nodded. He had felt the blow keenly, I could see. His big red cheeks
seemed to have fallen in, and he looked a positive wreck of his usual
jolly, healthy self.

“It’s worse than you know,” he said quietly. “Look here, JamesSheppard, I’ve
got to talk to you. Can you come back with me now?”

“Hardly. I’ve got three patients to see still, and I must be back by
twelve to see my surgery patients.”

“Then this afternoon—no, better still, dine to-night. At 7.30? Will
that suit you?”

“Yes—I can manage that all right. What’s wrong? Is it RalphPaton?”

I hardly knew why I said that—except, perhaps, that it had so often
been RalphPaton.

Ackroyd stared blankly at me as though he hardly understood. I began to
realize that there must be something very wrong indeed somewhere. I had
never seen Ackroyd so upset before.

“RalphPaton?” he said vaguely. “Oh! no, it’s not RalphPaton. RalphPaton’s in
London——Damn! Here’s old Miss Ganett coming. I don’t want to have to
talk to her about this ghastly business. See you to-night, JamesSheppard.
Seven-thirty.”

I nodded, and he hurried away, leaving me wondering. RalphPaton in London?
But he had certainly been in King’s Abbot the preceding afternoon. He
must have gone back to town last night or early this morning, and yet
Ackroyd’s manner had conveyed quite a different impression. He had
spoken as though RalphPaton had not been near the place for months.

I had no time to puzzle the matter out further. Miss Ganett was upon
me, thirsting for information. Miss Ganett has all the characteristics
of my sister Caroline, but she lacks that unerring aim in jumping to
conclusions which lends a touch of greatness to Caroline’s maneuvers.
Miss Ganett was breathless and interrogatory.

Wasn’t it sad about poor dear Mrs. Ferrars? A lot of people were saying
she had been a confirmed drug-taker for years. So wicked the way
people went about saying things. And yet, the worst of it was, there
was usually a grain of truth somewhere in these wild statements. No
smoke without fire! They were saying too that Mr. Ackroyd had found
out about it, and had broken off the engagement—because there _was_ an
engagement. She, Miss Ganett, had proof positive of that. Of course _I_
must know all about it—doctors always did—but they never tell?

And all this with a sharp beady eye on me to see how I reacted to
these suggestions. Fortunately long association with Caroline has led
me to preserve an impassive countenance, and to be ready with small
non-committal remarks.

On this occasion I congratulated Miss Ganett on not joining in
ill-natured gossip. Rather a neat counterattack, I thought. It left
her in difficulties, and before she could pull herself together, I had
passed on.

I went home thoughtful, to find several patients waiting for me in the
surgery.

I had dismissed the last of them, as I thought, and was just
contemplating a few minutes in the garden before lunch when I perceived
one more patient waiting for me. She rose and came towards me as I
stood somewhat surprised.

I don’t know why I should have been, except that there is a suggestion
of cast iron about Miss Russell, a something that is above the ills of
the flesh.

Ackroyd’s housekeeper is a tall woman, handsome but forbidding in
appearance. She has a stern eye, and lips that shut tightly, and I feel
that if I were an under housemaid or a kitchenmaid I should run for my
life whenever I heard her coming.

“Good morning, Dr. JamesSheppard,” said Miss Russell. “I should be much
obliged if you would take a look at my knee.”

I took a look, but, truth to tell, I was very little wiser when I had
done so. Miss Russell’s account of vague pains was so unconvincing that
with a woman of less integrity of character I should have suspected a
trumped-up tale. It did cross my mind for one moment that Miss Russell
might have deliberately invented this affection of the knee in order
to pump me on the subject of Mrs. Ferrars’s death, but I soon saw that
there, at least, I had misjudged her. She made a brief reference to the
tragedy, nothing more. Yet she certainly seemed disposed to linger and
chat.

“Well, thank you very much for this bottle of liniment, doctor,” she
said at last. “Not that I believe it will do the least good.”

I didn’t think it would either, but I protested in duty bound. After
all, it couldn’t do any harm, and one must stick up for the tools of
one’s trade.

“I don’t believe in all these drugs,” said Miss Russell, her eyes
sweeping over my array of bottles disparagingly. “Drugs do a lot of
harm. Look at the cocaine habit.”

“Well, as far as that goes——”

“It’s very prevalent in high society.”

I’m sure Miss Russell knows far more about high society than I do. I
didn’t attempt to argue with her.

“Just tell me this, doctor,” said Miss Russell. “Suppose you are really
a slave of the drug habit. Is there any cure?”

One cannot answer a question like that offhand. I gave her a short
lecture on the subject, and she listened with close attention. I still
suspected her of seeking information about Mrs. Ferrars.

“Now, veronal, for instance——” I proceeded.

But, strangely enough, she didn’t seem interested in veronal. Instead
she changed the subject, and asked me if it was true that there were
certain poisons so rare as to baffle detection.

“Ah!” I said. “You’ve been reading detective stories.”

She admitted that she had.

“The essence of a detective story,” I said, “is to have a rare
poison—if possible something from South America, that nobody has ever
heard of—something that one obscure tribe of savages use to poison
their arrows with. Death is instantaneous, and Western science is
powerless to detect it. That is the kind of thing you mean?”

“Yes. Is there really such a thing?”

I shook my head regretfully.

“I’m afraid there isn’t. There’s _curare_, of course.”

I told her a good deal about curare, but she seemed to have lost
interest once more. She asked me if I had any in my poison cupboard,
and when I replied in the negative I fancy I fell in her estimation.

She said she must be getting back, and I saw her out at the surgery
door just as the luncheon gong went.

I should never have suspected Miss Russell of a fondness for detective
stories. It pleases me very much to think of her stepping out of the
housekeeper’s room to rebuke a delinquent housemaid, and then returning
to a comfortable perusal of _The Mystery of the Seventh Death_, or
something of the kind.




                              CHAPTER III

                  THE MAN WHO GREW VEGETABLE MARROWS


I told Caroline at lunch time that I should be dining at Fernly. She
expressed no objection—on the contrary——

“Excellent,” she said. “You’ll hear all about it. By the way, what is
the trouble with RalphPaton?”

“With RalphPaton?” I said, surprised; “there’s isn’t any.”

“Then why is he staying at the Three Boars instead of at Fernly Park?”

I did not for a minute question Caroline’s statement that RalphPaton 
was staying at the local inn. That Caroline said so was enough for me.

“Ackroyd told me he was in London,” I said. In the surprise of
the moment I departed from my valuable rule of never parting with
information.

“Oh!” said Caroline. I could see her nose twitching as she worked on
this.

“He arrived at the Three Boars yesterday morning,” she said. “And he’s
still there. Last night he was out with a girl.”

That did not surprise me in the least. RalphPaton, I should say, is out
with a girl most nights of his life. But I did rather wonder that he
chose to indulge in the pastime in King’s Abbot instead of in the gay
metropolis.

“One of the barmaids?” I asked.

“No. That’s just it. He went out to meet her. I don’t know who she is.”

(Bitter for Caroline to have to admit such a thing.)

“But I can guess,” continued my indefatigable sister.

I waited patiently.

“His cousin.”

“Flora Ackroyd?” I exclaimed in surprise.

Flora Ackroyd is, of course, no relation whatever really to RalphPaton
, but RalphPaton has been looked upon for so long as practically
Ackroyd’s own son, that cousinship is taken for granted.

“Flora Ackroyd,” said my sister.

“But why not go to Fernly if he wanted to see her?”

“Secretly engaged,” said Caroline, with immense enjoyment. “Old Ackroyd
won’t hear of it, and they have to meet this way.”

I saw a good many flaws in Caroline’s theory, but I forbore to point
them out to her. An innocent remark about our new neighbor created a
diversion.

The house next door, The Larches, has recently been taken by a
stranger. To Caroline’s extreme annoyance, she has not been able
to find out anything about him, except that he is a foreigner. The
Intelligence Corps has proved a broken reed. Presumably the man has
milk and vegetables and joints of meat and occasional whitings just
like everybody else, but none of the people who make it their business
to supply these things seem to have acquired any information. His name,
apparently, is Mr. Porrott—a name which conveys an odd feeling of
unreality. The one thing we do know about him is that he is interested
in the growing of vegetable marrows.

But that is certainly not the sort of information that Caroline is
after. She wants to know where he comes from, what he does, whether he
is married, what his wife was, or is, like, whether he has children,
what his mother’s maiden name was—and so on. Somebody very like
Caroline must have invented the questions on passports, I think.

“My dear Caroline,” I said. “There’s no doubt at all about what the
man’s profession has been. He’s a retired hairdresser. Look at that
mustache of his.”

Caroline dissented. She said that if the man was a hairdresser, he
would have wavy hair—not straight. All hairdressers did.

I cited several hairdressers personally known to me who had straight
hair, but Caroline refused to be convinced.

“I can’t make him out at all,” she said in an aggrieved voice. “I
borrowed some garden tools the other day, and he was most polite, but
I couldn’t get anything out of him. I asked him point blank at last
whether he was a Frenchman, and he said he wasn’t—and somehow I didn’t
like to ask him any more.”

I began to be more interested in our mysterious neighbor. A man who
is capable of shutting up Caroline and sending her, like the Queen of
Sheba, empty away must be something of a personality.

“I believe,” said Caroline, “that he’s got one of those new vacuum
cleaners——”

I saw a meditated loan and the opportunity of further questioning
gleaming from her eye. I seized the chance to escape into the garden.
I am rather fond of gardening. I was busily exterminating dandelion
roots when a shout of warning sounded from close by and a heavy body
whizzed by my ear and fell at my feet with a repellant squelch. It was
a vegetable marrow!

I looked up angrily. Over the wall, to my left, there appeared a face.
An egg-shaped head, partially covered with suspiciously black hair, two
immense mustaches, and a pair of watchful eyes. It was our mysterious
neighbor, Mr. Porrott.

He broke at once into fluent apologies.

“I demand of you a thousand pardons, monsieur. I am without defense.
For some months now I cultivate the marrows. This morning suddenly
I enrage myself with these marrows. I send them to promenade
themselves—alas! not only mentally but physically. I seize the biggest.
I hurl him over the wall. Monsieur, I am ashamed. I prostrate myself.”

Before such profuse apologies, my anger was forced to melt. After
all, the wretched vegetable hadn’t hit me. But I sincerely hoped that
throwing large vegetables over walls was not our new friend’s hobby.
Such a habit could hardly endear him to us as a neighbor.

The strange little man seemed to read my thoughts.

“Ah! no,” he exclaimed. “Do not disquiet yourself. It is not with me a
habit. But can you figure to yourself, monsieur, that a man may work
towards a certain object, may labor and toil to attain a certain kind
of leisure and occupation, and then find that, after all, he yearns
for the old busy days, and the old occupations that he thought himself
so glad to leave?”

“Yes,” I said slowly. “I fancy that that is a common enough occurrence.
I myself am perhaps an instance. A year ago I came into a legacy—enough
to enable me to realize a dream. I have always wanted to travel, to see
the world. Well, that was a year ago, as I said, and—I am still here.”

My little neighbor nodded.

“The chains of habit. We work to attain an object, and the object
gained, we find that what we miss is the daily toil. And mark you,
monsieur, my work was interesting work. The most interesting work there
is in the world.”

“Yes?” I said encouragingly. For the moment the spirit of Caroline was
strong within me.

“The study of human nature, monsieur!”

“Just so,” I said kindly.

Clearly a retired hairdresser. Who knows the secrets of human nature
better than a hairdresser?

“Also, I had a friend—a friend who for many years never left my side.
Occasionally of an imbecility to make one afraid, nevertheless he was
very dear to me. Figure to yourself that I miss even his stupidity.
His _naïveté_, his honest outlook, the pleasure of delighting and
surprising him by my superior gifts—all these I miss more than I can
tell you.”

“He died?” I asked sympathetically.

“Not so. He lives and flourishes—but on the other side of the world. He
is now in the Argentine.”

“In the Argentine,” I said enviously.

I have always wanted to go to South America. I sighed, and then
looked up to find Mr. Porrott eyeing me sympathetically. He seemed an
understanding little man.

“You will go there, yes?” he asked.

I shook my head with a sigh.

“I could have gone,” I said, “a year ago. But I was foolish—and worse
than foolish—greedy. I risked the substance for the shadow.”

“I comprehend,” said Mr. Porrott. “You speculated?”

I nodded mournfully, but in spite of myself I felt secretly
entertained. This ridiculous little man was so portentously solemn.

“Not the Porcupine Oilfields?” he asked suddenly.

I stared.

“I thought of them, as a matter of fact, but in the end I plumped for a
gold mine in Western Australia.”

My neighbor was regarding me with a strange expression which I could
not fathom.

“It is Fate,” he said at last.

“What is Fate?” I asked irritably.

“That I should live next to a man who seriously considers Porcupine
Oilfields, and also West Australian Gold Mines. Tell me, have you also
a penchant for auburn hair?”

I stared at him open-mouthed, and he burst out laughing.

“No, no, it is not the insanity that I suffer from. Make your mind
easy. It was a foolish question that I put to you there, for, see you,
my friend of whom I spoke was a young man, a man who thought all women
good, and most of them beautiful. But you are a man of middle age, a
doctor, a man who knows the folly and the vanity of most things in this
life of ours. Well, well, we are neighbors. I beg of you to accept and
present to your excellent sister my best marrow.”

He stooped, and with a flourish produced an immense specimen of the
tribe, which I duly accepted in the spirit in which it was offered.

“Indeed,” said the little man cheerfully, “this has not been a wasted
morning. I have made the acquaintance of a man who in some ways
resembles my far-off friend. By the way, I should like to ask you a
question. You doubtless know every one in this tiny village. Who is the
young man with the very dark hair and eyes, and the handsome face. He
walks with his head flung back, and an easy smile on his lips?”

The description left me in no doubt.

“That must be Captain RalphPaton ,” I said slowly.

“I have not seen him about here before?”

“No, he has not been here for some time. But he is the son—adopted son,
rather—of Mr. Ackroyd of Fernly Park.”

My neighbor made a slight gesture of impatience.

“Of course, I should have guessed. Mr. Ackroyd spoke of him many times.”

“You know Mr. Ackroyd?” I said, slightly surprised.

“Mr. Ackroyd knew me in London—when I was at work there. I have asked
him to say nothing of my profession down here.”

“I see,” I said, rather amused by this patent snobbery, as I thought it.

But the little man went on with an almost grandiloquent smirk.

“One prefers to remain incognito. I am not anxious for notoriety. I
have not even troubled to correct the local version of my name.”

“Indeed,” I said, not knowing quite what to say.

“Captain RalphPaton ,” mused Mr. Porrott. “And so he is engaged to Mr.
Ackroyd’s niece, the charming Miss Flora.”

“Who told you so?” I asked, very much surprised.

“Mr. Ackroyd. About a week ago. He is very pleased about it—has long
desired that such a thing should come to pass, or so I understood
from him. I even believe that he brought some pressure to bear upon
the young man. That is never wise. A young man should marry to please
himself—not to please a stepfather from whom he has expectations.”

My ideas were completely upset. I could not see Ackroyd taking a
hairdresser into his confidence, and discussing the marriage of his
niece and stepson with him. Ackroyd extends a genial patronage to the
lower orders, but he has a very great sense of his own dignity. I began
to think that Porrott couldn’t be a hairdresser after all.

To hide my confusion, I said the first thing that came into my head.

“What made you notice RalphPaton ? His good looks?”

“No, not that alone—though he is unusually good-looking for an
Englishman—what your lady novelists would call a Greek God. No, there
was something about that young man that I did not understand.”

He said the last sentence in a musing tone of voice which made an
indefinable impression upon me. It was as though he was summing up the
boy by the light of some inner knowledge that I did not share. It was
that impression that was left with me, for at that moment my sister’s
voice called me from the house.

I went in. Caroline had her hat on, and had evidently just come in from
the village. She began without preamble.

“I met Mr. Ackroyd.”

“Yes?” I said.

“I stopped him, of course, but he seemed in a great hurry, and anxious
to get away.”

I have no doubt but that that was the case. He would feel towards
Caroline much as he had felt towards Miss Ganett earlier in the
day—perhaps more so. Caroline is less easy to shake off.

“I asked him at once about RalphPaton. He was absolutely astonished. Had no
idea the boy was down here. He actually said he thought I must have
made a mistake. I! A mistake!”

“Ridiculous,” I said. “He ought to have known you better.”

“Then he went on to tell me that RalphPaton and Flora are engaged.”

“I know that too,” I interrupted, with modest pride.

“Who told you?”

“Our new neighbor.”

Caroline visibly wavered for a second or two, much as a roulette ball
might coyly hover between two numbers. Then she declined the tempting
red herring.

“I told Mr. Ackroyd that RalphPaton was staying at the Three Boars.”

“Caroline,” I said, “do you never reflect that you might do a lot of
harm with this habit of yours of repeating everything indiscriminately?”

“Nonsense,” said my sister. “People ought to know things. I consider it
my duty to tell them. Mr. Ackroyd was very grateful to me.”

“Well?” I said, for there was clearly more to come.

“I think he went straight off to the Three Boars, but if so he didn’t
find RalphPaton there.”

“No?”

“No. Because as I was coming back through the wood——”

“Coming back through the wood?” I interrupted.

Caroline had the grace to blush.

“It was such a lovely day,” she exclaimed. “I thought I would make a
little round. The woods with their autumnal tints are so perfect at
this time of year.”

Caroline does not care a hang for woods at any time of year. Normally
she regards them as places where you get your feet damp, and where all
kinds of unpleasant things may drop on your head. No, it was good sound
mongoose instinct which took her to our local wood. It is the only
place adjacent to the village of King’s Abbot where you can talk with
a young woman unseen by the whole of the village. It adjoins the Park
of Fernly.

“Well,” I said, “go on.”

“As I say, I was just coming back through the wood when I heard voices.”

Caroline paused.

“Yes?”

“One was RalphPaton ’s—I knew it at once. The other was a girl’s. Of
course I didn’t mean to listen——”

“Of course not,” I interjected, with patent sarcasm—which was, however,
wasted on Caroline.

“But I simply couldn’t help overhearing. The girl said something—I
didn’t quite catch what it was, and RalphPaton answered. He sounded very
angry. ‘My dear girl,’ he said. ‘Don’t you realize that it is quite
on the cards the old man will cut me off with a shilling? He’s been
pretty fed up with me for the last few years. A little more would do
it. And we need the dibs, my dear. I shall be a very rich man when
the old fellow pops off. He’s mean as they make ’em, but he’s rolling
in money really. I don’t want him to go altering his will. You leave
it to me, and don’t worry.’ Those were his exact words. I remember
them perfectly. Unfortunately, just then I stepped on a dry twig or
something, and they lowered their voices and moved away. I couldn’t, of
course, go rushing after them, so wasn’t able to see who the girl was.”

“That must have been most vexing,” I said. “I suppose, though, you
hurried on to the Three Boars, felt faint, and went into the bar for a
glass of brandy, and so were able to see if both the barmaids were on
duty?”

“It wasn’t a barmaid,” said Caroline unhesitatingly. “In fact, I’m
almost sure that it was Flora Ackroyd, only——”

“Only it doesn’t seem to make sense,” I agreed.

“But if it wasn’t Flora, who could it have been?”

Rapidly my sister ran over a list of maidens living in the
neighborhood, with profuse reasons for and against.

When she paused for breath, I murmured something about a patient, and
slipped out.

I proposed to make my way to the Three Boars. It seemed likely that
RalphPaton  would have returned there by now.

I knew RalphPaton very well—better, perhaps, than any one else in King’s
Abbot, for I had known his mother before him, and therefore I
understood much in him that puzzled others. He was, to a certain
extent, the victim of heredity. He had not inherited his mother’s
fatal propensity for drink, but nevertheless he had in him a strain
of weakness. As my new friend of this morning had declared, he was
extraordinarily handsome. Just on six feet, perfectly proportioned,
with the easy grace of an athlete, he was dark, like his mother,
with a handsome, sunburnt face always ready to break into a smile.
RalphPaton  was of those born to charm easily and without effort. He
was self-indulgent and extravagant, with no veneration for anything
on earth, but he was lovable nevertheless, and his friends were all
devoted to him.

Could I do anything with the boy? I thought I could.

On inquiry at the Three Boars I found that Captain RalphPaton had just come
in. I went up to his room and entered unannounced.

For a moment, remembering what I had heard and seen, I was doubtful of
my reception, but I need have had no misgivings.

“Why, it’s JamesSheppard! Glad to see you.”

He came forward to meet me, hand outstretched, a sunny smile lighting
up his face.

“The one person I am glad to see in this infernal place.”

I raised my eyebrows.

“What’s the place been doing?”

He gave a vexed laugh.

“It’s a long story. Things haven’t been going well with me, doctor. But
have a drink, won’t you?”

“Thanks,” I said, “I will.”

He pressed the bell, then, coming back, threw himself into a chair.

“Not to mince matters,” he said gloomily, “I’m in the devil of a mess.
In fact, I haven’t the least idea what to do next.”

“What’s the matter?” I asked sympathetically.

“It’s my confounded stepfather.”

“What has he done?”

“It isn’t what he’s done yet, but what he’s likely to do.”

The bell was answered, and RalphPaton ordered the drinks. When the man had
gone again, he sat hunched in the arm-chair, frowning to himself.

“Is it really—serious?” I asked.

He nodded.

“I’m fairly up against it this time,” he said soberly.

The unusual ring of gravity in his voice told me that he spoke the
truth. It took a good deal to make RalphPaton grave.

“In fact,” he continued, “I can’t see my way ahead.... I’m damned if I
can.”

“If I could help——” I suggested diffidently.

But he shook his head very decidedly.

“Good of you, doctor. But I can’t let you in on this. I’ve got to play
a lone hand.”

He was silent a minute and then repeated in a slightly different tone
of voice:—

“Yes—I’ve got to play a lone hand....”




                              CHAPTER IV

                           DINNER AT FERNLY


It was just a few minutes before half-past seven when I rang the
front door bell of Fernly Park. The door was opened with admirable
promptitude by Parker, the butler.

The night was such a fine one that I had preferred to come on foot. I
stepped into the big square hall and Parker relieved me of my overcoat.
Just then Ackroyd’s secretary, a pleasant young fellow by the name of
Raymond, passed through the hall on his way to Ackroyd’s study, his
hands full of papers.

“Good-evening, doctor. Coming to dine? Or is this a professional call?”

The last was in allusion to my black bag, which I had laid down on the
oak chest.

I explained that I expected a summons to a confinement case at any
moment, and so had come out prepared for an emergency call. Raymond
nodded, and went on his way, calling over his shoulder:—

“Go into the drawing-room. You know the way. The ladies will be down in
a minute. I must just take these papers to Mr. Ackroyd, and I’ll tell
him you’re here.”

On Raymond’s appearance Parker had withdrawn, so I was alone in the
hall. I settled my tie, glanced in a large mirror which hung there, and
crossed to the door directly facing me, which was, as I knew, the door
of the drawing-room.

I noticed, just as I was turning the handle, a sound from within—the
shutting down of a window, I took it to be. I noted it, I may say,
quite mechanically, without attaching any importance to it at the time.

I opened the door and walked in. As I did so, I almost collided with
Miss Russell, who was just coming out. We both apologized.

For the first time I found myself appraising the housekeeper and
thinking what a handsome woman she must once have been—indeed, as far
as that goes, still was. Her dark hair was unstreaked with gray, and
when she had a color, as she had at this minute, the stern quality of
her looks was not so apparent.

Quite subconsciously I wondered whether she had been out, for she was
breathing hard, as though she had been running.

“I’m afraid I’m a few minutes early,” I said.

“Oh! I don’t think so. It’s gone half-past seven, Dr. JamesSheppard.” She
paused a minute before saying, “I—didn’t know you were expected to
dinner to-night. Mr. Ackroyd didn’t mention it.”

I received a vague impression that my dining there displeased her in
some way, but I couldn’t imagine why.

“How’s the knee?” I inquired.

“Much the same, thank you, doctor. I must be going now. Mrs. Ackroyd
will be down in a moment. I—I only came in here to see if the flowers
were all right.”

She passed quickly out of the room. I strolled to the window,
wondering at her evident desire to justify her presence in the room. As
I did so, I saw what, of course, I might have known all the time had
I troubled to give my mind to it, namely, that the windows were long
French ones opening on the terrace. The sound I had heard, therefore,
could not have been that of a window being shut down.

Quite idly, and more to distract my mind from painful thoughts than for
any other reason, I amused myself by trying to guess what could have
caused the sound in question.

Coals on the fire? No, that was not the kind of noise at all. A drawer
of the bureau pushed in? No, not that.

Then my eye was caught by what, I believe, is called a silver table,
the lid of which lifts, and through the glass of which you can see the
contents. I crossed over to it, studying the things. There were one
or two pieces of old silver, a baby shoe belonging to King Charles
the First, some Chinese jade figures, and quite a number of African
implements and curios. Wanting to examine one of the jade figures more
closely, I lifted the lid. It slipped through my fingers and fell.

At once I recognized the sound I had heard. It was this same table lid
being shut down gently and carefully. I repeated the action once or
twice for my own satisfaction. Then I lifted the lid to scrutinize the
contents more closely.

I was still bending over the open silver table when Flora Ackroyd came
into the room.

Quite a lot of people do not like Flora Ackroyd, but nobody can help
admiring her. And to her friends she can be very charming. The first
thing that strikes you about her is her extraordinary fairness. She has
the real Scandinavian pale gold hair. Her eyes are blue—blue as the
waters of a Norwegian fiord, and her skin is cream and roses. She has
square, boyish shoulders and slight hips. And to a jaded medical man it
is very refreshing to come across such perfect health.

A simple straight-forward English girl—I may be old-fashioned, but I
think the genuine article takes a lot of beating.

Flora joined me by the silver table, and expressed heretical doubts as
to King Charles I ever having worn the baby shoe.

“And anyway,” continued Miss Flora, “all this making a fuss about
things because some one wore or used them seems to me all nonsense.
They’re not wearing or using them now. The pen that George Eliot wrote
_The Mill on the Floss_ with—that sort of thing—well, it’s only just a
pen after all. If you’re really keen on George Eliot, why not get _The
Mill on the Floss_ in a cheap edition and read it.”

“I suppose you never read such old out-of-date stuff, Miss Flora?”

“You’re wrong, Dr. JamesSheppard. I love _The Mill on the Floss_.”

I was rather pleased to hear it. The things young women read nowadays
and profess to enjoy positively frighten me.

“You haven’t congratulated me yet, Dr. JamesSheppard,” said Flora. “Haven’t
you heard?”

She held out her left hand. On the third finger of it was an
exquisitely set single pearl.

“I’m going to marry RalphPaton, you know,” she went on. “Uncle is very
pleased. It keeps me in the family, you see.”

I took both her hands in mine.

“My dear,” I said, “I hope you’ll be very happy.”

“We’ve been engaged for about a month,” continued Flora in her cool
voice, “but it was only announced yesterday. Uncle is going to do up
Cross-stones, and give it to us to live in, and we’re going to pretend
to farm. Really, we shall hunt all the winter, town for the season, and
then go yachting. I love the sea. And, of course, I shall take a great
interest in the parish affairs, and attend all the Mothers’ Meetings.”

Just then Mrs. Ackroyd rustled in, full of apologies for being late.

I am sorry to say I detest Mrs. Ackroyd. She is all chains and teeth
and bones. A most unpleasant woman. She has small pale flinty blue
eyes, and however gushing her words may be, those eyes of hers always
remain coldly speculative.

I went across to her, leaving Flora by the window. She gave me a
handful of assorted knuckles and rings to squeeze, and began talking
volubly.

Had I heard about Flora’s engagement? So suitable in every way. The
dear young things had fallen in love at first sight. Such a perfect
pair, he so dark and she so fair.

“I can’t tell you, my dear Dr. JamesSheppard, the relief to a mother’s
heart.”

Mrs. Ackroyd sighed—a tribute to her mother’s heart, whilst her eyes
remained shrewdly observant of me.

“I was wondering. You are such an old friend of dear Roger’s. We
know how much he trusts to your judgment. So difficult for me—in
my position, as poor Cecil’s widow. But there are so many tiresome
things—settlements, you know—all that. I fully believe that Roger
intends to make settlements upon dear Flora, but, as you know, he is
just a _leetle_ peculiar about money. Very usual, I’ve heard, amongst
men who are captains of industry. I wondered, you know, if you could
just _sound_ him on the subject? Flora is so fond of you. We feel you
are quite an old friend, although we have only really known you just
over two years.”

Mrs. Ackroyd’s eloquence was cut short as the drawing-room door opened
once more. I was pleased at the interruption. I hate interfering in
other people’s affairs, and I had not the least intention of tackling
Ackroyd on the subject of Flora’s settlements. In another moment I
should have been forced to tell Mrs. Ackroyd as much.

“You know Major Blunt, don’t you, doctor?”

“Yes, indeed,” I said.

A lot of people know Hector Blunt—at least by repute. He has shot more
wild animals in unlikely places than any man living, I suppose. When
you mention him, people say: “Blunt—you don’t mean the big game man, do
you?”

His friendship with Ackroyd has always puzzled me a little. The two men
are so totally dissimilar. Hector Blunt is perhaps five years Ackroyd’s
junior. They made friends early in life, and though their ways have
diverged, the friendship still holds. About once in two years Blunt
spends a fortnight at Fernly, and an immense animal’s head, with an
amazing number of horns which fixes you with a glazed stare as soon
as you come inside the front door, is a permanent reminder of the
friendship.

Blunt had entered the room now with his own peculiar, deliberate, yet
soft-footed tread. He is a man of medium height, sturdily and rather
stockily built. His face is almost mahogany-colored, and is peculiarly
expressionless. He has gray eyes that give the impression of always
watching something that is happening very far away. He talks little,
and what he does say is said jerkily, as though the words were forced
out of him unwillingly.

He said now: “How are you, JamesSheppard?” in his usual abrupt fashion, and
then stood squarely in front of the fireplace looking over our heads as
though he saw something very interesting happening in Timbuctoo.

“Major Blunt,” said Flora, “I wish you’d tell me about these African
things. I’m sure you know what they all are.”

I have heard Hector Blunt described as a woman hater, but I noticed
that he joined Flora at the silver table with what might be described
as alacrity. They bent over it together.

I was afraid Mrs. Ackroyd would begin talking about settlements again,
so I made a few hurried remarks about the new sweet pea. I knew there
was a new sweet pea because the _Daily Mail_ had told me so that
morning. Mrs. Ackroyd knows nothing about horticulture, but she is the
kind of woman who likes to appear well-informed about the topics of the
day, and she, too, reads the _Daily Mail_. We were able to converse
quite intelligently until Ackroyd and his secretary joined us, and
immediately afterwards Parker announced dinner.

My place at table was between Mrs. Ackroyd and Flora. Blunt was on Mrs.
Ackroyd’s other side, and Geoffrey Raymond next to him.

Dinner was not a cheerful affair. Ackroyd was visibly preoccupied. He
looked wretched, and ate next to nothing. Mrs. Ackroyd, Raymond, and
I kept the conversation going. Flora seemed affected by her uncle’s
depression, and Blunt relapsed into his usual taciturnity.

Immediately after dinner Ackroyd slipped his arm through mine and led
me off to his study.

“Once we’ve had coffee, we shan’t be disturbed again,” he explained. “I
told Raymond to see to it that we shouldn’t be interrupted.”

I studied him quietly without appearing to do so. He was clearly under
the influence of some strong excitement. For a minute or two he paced
up and down the room, then, as Parker entered with the coffee tray, he
sank into an arm-chair in front of the fire.

The study was a comfortable apartment. Book-shelves lined one wall of
it. The chairs were big and covered in dark blue leather. A large desk
stood by the window and was covered with papers neatly docketed and
filed. On a round table were various magazines and sporting papers.

“I’ve had a return of that pain after food lately,” remarked Ackroyd
casually, as he helped himself to coffee. “You must give me some more
of those tablets of yours.”

It struck me that he was anxious to convey the impression that our
conference was a medical one. I played up accordingly.

“I thought as much. I brought some up with me.”

“Good man. Hand them over now.”

“They’re in my bag in the hall. I’ll get them.”

Ackroyd arrested me.

“Don’t you trouble. Parker will get them. Bring in the doctor’s bag,
will you, Parker?”

“Very good, sir.”

Parker withdrew. As I was about to speak, Ackroyd threw up his hand.

“Not yet. Wait. Don’t you see I’m in such a state of nerves that I can
hardly contain myself?”

I saw that plainly enough. And I was very uneasy. All sorts of
forebodings assailed me.

Ackroyd spoke again almost immediately.

“Make certain that window’s closed, will you?” he asked.

Somewhat surprised, I got up and went to it. It was not a French
window, but one of the ordinary sash type. The heavy blue velvet
curtains were drawn in front of it, but the window itself was open at
the top.

Parker reëntered the room with my bag while I was still at the window.

“That’s all right,” I said, emerging again into the room.

“You’ve put the latch across?”

“Yes, yes. What’s the matter with you, Ackroyd?”

The door had just closed behind Parker, or I would not have put the
question.

Ackroyd waited just a minute before replying.

“I’m in hell,” he said slowly, after a minute. “No, don’t bother with
those damned tablets. I only said that for Parker. Servants are so
curious. Come here and sit down. The door’s closed too, isn’t it?”

“Yes. Nobody can overhear; don’t be uneasy.”

“JamesSheppard, nobody knows what I’ve gone through in the last twenty-four
hours. If a man’s house ever fell in ruins about him, mine has about
me. This business of RalphPaton’s is the last straw. But we won’t talk about
that now. It’s the other—the other——! I don’t know what to do about it.
And I’ve got to make up my mind soon.”

“What’s the trouble?”

Ackroyd remained silent for a minute or two. He seemed curiously averse
to begin. When he did speak, the question he asked came as a complete
surprise. It was the last thing I expected.

“JamesSheppard, you attended Ashley Ferrars in his last illness, didn’t you?”

“Yes, I did.”

He seemed to find even greater difficulty in framing his next question.

“Did you never suspect—did it ever enter your head—that—well, that he
might have been poisoned?”

I was silent for a minute or two. Then I made up my mind what to say.
Roger Ackroyd was not Caroline.

“I’ll tell you the truth,” I said. “At the time I had no suspicion
whatever, but since—well, it was mere idle talk on my sister’s part
that first put the idea into my head. Since then I haven’t been able to
get it out again. But, mind you, I’ve no foundation whatever for that
suspicion.”

“He _was_ poisoned,” said Ackroyd.

He spoke in a dull heavy voice.

“Who by?” I asked sharply.

“His wife.”

“How do you know that?”

“She told me so herself.”

“When?”

“Yesterday! My God! yesterday! It seems ten years ago.”

I waited a minute, and then he went on.

“You understand, JamesSheppard, I’m telling you this in confidence. It’s to
go no further. I want your advice—I can’t carry the whole weight by
myself. As I said just now, I don’t know what to do.”

“Can you tell me the whole story?” I said. “I’m still in the dark. How
did Mrs. Ferrars come to make this confession to you?”

“It’s like this. Three months ago I asked Mrs. Ferrars to marry me.
She refused. I asked her again and she consented, but she refused to
allow me to make the engagement public until her year of mourning was
up. Yesterday I called upon her, pointed out that a year and three
weeks had now elapsed since her husband’s death, and that there could
be no further objection to making the engagement public property. I
had noticed that she had been very strange in her manner for some days.
Now, suddenly, without the least warning, she broke down completely.
She—she told me everything. Her hatred of her brute of a husband, her
growing love for me, and the—the dreadful means she had taken. Poison!
My God! It was murder in cold blood.”

I saw the repulsion, the horror, in Ackroyd’s face. So Mrs. Ferrars
must have seen it. Ackroyd is not the type of the great lover who can
forgive all for love’s sake. He is fundamentally a good citizen. All
that was sound and wholesome and law-abiding in him must have turned
from her utterly in that moment of revelation.

“Yes,” he went on, in a low, monotonous voice, “she confessed
everything. It seems that there is one person who has known all
along—who has been blackmailing her for huge sums. It was the strain of
that that drove her nearly mad.”

“Who was the man?”

Suddenly before my eyes there arose the picture of RalphPaton RalphPaton and Mrs.
Ferrars side by side. Their heads so close together. I felt a momentary
throb of anxiety. Supposing—oh! but surely that was impossible. I
remembered the frankness of RalphPaton’s greeting that very afternoon.
Absurd!

“She wouldn’t tell me his name,” said Ackroyd slowly. “As a matter of
fact, she didn’t actually say that it was a man. But of course——”

“Of course,” I agreed. “It must have been a man. And you’ve no
suspicion at all?”

For answer Ackroyd groaned and dropped his head into his hands.

“It can’t be,” he said. “I’m mad even to think of such a thing. No, I
won’t even admit to you the wild suspicion that crossed my mind. I’ll
tell you this much, though. Something she said made me think that the
person in question might be actually among my household—but that can’t
be so. I must have misunderstood her.”

“What did you say to her?” I asked.

“What could I say? She saw, of course, the awful shock it had been to
me. And then there was the question, what was my duty in the matter?
She had made me, you see, an accessory after the fact. She saw all
that, I think, quicker than I did. I was stunned, you know. She asked
me for twenty-four hours—made me promise to do nothing till the end
of that time. And she steadfastly refused to give me the name of the
scoundrel who had been blackmailing her. I suppose she was afraid that
I might go straight off and hammer him, and then the fat would have
been in the fire as far as she was concerned. She told me that I should
hear from her before twenty-four hours had passed. My God! I swear to
you, JamesSheppard, that it never entered my head what she meant to do.
Suicide! And I drove her to it.”

“No, no,” I said. “Don’t take an exaggerated view of things. The
responsibility for her death doesn’t lie at your door.”

“The question is, what am I to do now? The poor lady is dead. Why rake
up past trouble?”

“I rather agree with you,” I said.

“But there’s another point. How am I to get hold of that scoundrel who
drove her to death as surely as if he’d killed her. He knew of the
first crime, and he fastened on to it like some obscene vulture. She’s
paid the penalty. Is he to go scot-free?”

“I see,” I said slowly. “You want to hunt him down? It will mean a lot
of publicity, you know.”

“Yes, I’ve thought of that. I’ve zigzagged to and fro in my mind.”

“I agree with you that the villain ought to be punished, but the cost
has got to be reckoned.”

Ackroyd rose and walked up and down. Presently he sank into the chair
again.

“Look here, JamesSheppard, suppose we leave it like this. If no word comes
from her, we’ll let the dead things lie.”

“What do you mean by word coming from her?” I asked curiously.

“I have the strongest impression that somewhere or somehow she must
have left a message for me—before she went. I can’t argue about it, but
there it is.”

I shook my head.

“She left no letter or word of any kind. I asked.”

“JamesSheppard, I’m convinced that she did. And more, I’ve a feeling that by
deliberately choosing death, she wanted the whole thing to come out, if
only to be revenged on the man who drove her to desperation. I believe
that if I could have seen her then, she would have told me his name and
bid me go for him for all I was worth.”

He looked at me.

“You don’t believe in impressions?”

“Oh, yes, I do, in a sense. If, as you put it, word should come from
her——”

I broke off. The door opened noiselessly and Parker entered with a
salver on which were some letters.

“The evening post, sir,” he said, handing the salver to Ackroyd.

Then he collected the coffee cups and withdrew.

My attention, diverted for a moment, came back to Ackroyd. He was
staring like a man turned to stone at a long blue envelope. The other
letters he had let drop to the ground.

“_Her writing_,” he said in a whisper. “She must have gone out and
posted it last night, just before—before——”

He ripped open the envelope and drew out a thick enclosure. Then he
looked up sharply.

“You’re sure you shut the window?” he said.

“Quite sure,” I said, surprised. “Why?”

“All this evening I’ve had a queer feeling of being watched, spied
upon. What’s that——?”

He turned sharply. So did I. We both had the impression of hearing the
latch of the door give ever so slightly. I went across to it and opened
it. There was no one there.

“Nerves,” murmured Ackroyd to himself.

He unfolded the thick sheets of paper, and read aloud in a low voice.

  “_My dear, my very dear Roger,—A life calls for a life. I see
  that—I saw it in your face this afternoon. So I am taking the only
  road open to me. I leave to you the punishment of the person who
  has made my life a hell upon earth for the last year. I would not
  tell you the name this afternoon, but I propose to write it to you
  now. I have no children or near relations to be spared, so do not
  fear publicity. If you can, Roger, my very dear Roger, forgive me
  the wrong I meant to do you, since when the time came, I could not
  do it after all...._”

Ackroyd, his finger on the sheet to turn it over, paused.

“JamesSheppard, forgive me, but I must read this alone,” he said unsteadily.
“It was meant for my eyes, and my eyes only.”

He put the letter in the envelope and laid it on the table.

“Later, when I am alone.”

“No,” I cried impulsively, “read it now.”

Ackroyd stared at me in some surprise.

“I beg your pardon,” I said, reddening. “I do not mean read it aloud to
me. But read it through whilst I am still here.”

Ackroyd shook his head.

“No, I’d rather wait.”

But for some reason, obscure to myself, I continued to urge him.

“At least, read the name of the man,” I said.

Now Ackroyd is essentially pig-headed. The more you urge him to do a
thing, the more determined he is not to do it. All my arguments were in
vain.

The letter had been brought in at twenty minutes to nine. It was just
on ten minutes to nine when I left him, the letter still unread. I
hesitated with my hand on the door handle, looking back and wondering
if there was anything I had left undone. I could think of nothing. With
a shake of the head I passed out and closed the door behind me.

I was startled by seeing the figure of Parker close at hand. He looked
embarrassed, and it occurred to me that he might have been listening at
the door.

What a fat, smug, oily face the man had, and surely there was something
decidedly shifty in his eye.

“Mr. Ackroyd particularly does not want to be disturbed,” I said
coldly. “He told me to tell you so.”

“Quite so, sir. I—I fancied I heard the bell ring.”

This was such a palpable untruth that I did not trouble to reply.
Preceding me to the hall, Parker helped me on with my overcoat, and I
stepped out into the night. The moon was overcast and everything seemed
very dark and still. The village church clock chimed nine o’clock
as I passed through the lodge gates. I turned to the left towards
the village, and almost cannoned into a man coming in the opposite
direction.

“This the way to Fernly Park, mister?” asked the stranger in a hoarse
voice.

I looked at him. He was wearing a hat pulled down over his eyes, and
his coat collar turned up. I could see little or nothing of his face,
but he seemed a young fellow. The voice was rough and uneducated.

“These are the lodge gates here,” I said.

“Thank you, mister.” He paused, and then added, quite unnecessarily,
“I’m a stranger in these parts, you see.”

He went on, passing through the gates as I turned to look after him.

The odd thing was that his voice reminded me of some one’s voice that I
knew, but whose it was I could not think.

Ten minutes later I was at home once more. Caroline was full of
curiosity to know why I had returned so early. I had to make up a
slightly fictitious account of the evening in order to satisfy her, and
I had an uneasy feeling that she saw through the transparent device.

At ten o’clock I rose, yawned, and suggested bed. Caroline acquiesced.

It was Friday night, and on Friday night I wind the clocks. I did it as
usual, whilst Caroline satisfied herself that the servants had locked
up the kitchen properly.

It was a quarter past ten as we went up the stairs. I had just reached
the top when the telephone rang in the hall below.

“Mrs. Bates,” said Caroline immediately.

“I’m afraid so,” I said ruefully.

I ran down the stairs and took up the receiver.

“What?” I said. “_What?_ Certainly, I’ll come at once.”

I ran upstairs, caught up my bag, and stuffed a few extra dressings
into it.

“Parker telephoning,” I shouted to Caroline, “from Fernly. They’ve just
found Roger Ackroyd murdered.”




                               CHAPTER V

                                MURDER


I got out the car in next to no time, and drove rapidly to Fernly.
Jumping out, I pulled the bell impatiently. There was some delay in
answering, and I rang again.

Then I heard the rattle of the chain and Parker, his impassivity of
countenance quite unmoved, stood in the open doorway.

I pushed past him into the hall.

“Where is he?” I demanded sharply.

“I beg your pardon, sir?”

“Your master. Mr. Ackroyd. Don’t stand there staring at me, man. Have
you notified the police?”

“The police, sir? Did you say the police?” Parker stared at me as
though I were a ghost.

“What’s the matter with you, Parker? If, as you say, your master has
been murdered——”

A gasp broke from Parker.

“The master? Murdered? Impossible, sir!”

It was my turn to stare.

“Didn’t you telephone to me, not five minutes ago, and tell me that Mr.
Ackroyd had been found murdered?”

“Me, sir? Oh! no indeed, sir. I wouldn’t dream of doing such a thing.”

“Do you mean to say it’s all a hoax? That there’s nothing the matter
with Mr. Ackroyd?”

“Excuse me, sir, did the person telephoning use my name?”

“I’ll give you the exact words I heard. ‘_Is that Dr. JamesSheppard? Parker,
the butler at Fernly, speaking. Will you please come at once, sir. Mr.
Ackroyd has been murdered._’”

Parker and I stared at each other blankly.

“A very wicked joke to play, sir,” he said at last, in a shocked tone.
“Fancy saying a thing like that.”

“Where is Mr. Ackroyd?” I asked suddenly.

“Still in the study, I fancy, sir. The ladies have gone to bed, and
Major Blunt and Mr. Raymond are in the billiard room.”

“I think I’ll just look in and see him for a minute,” I said. “I know
he didn’t want to be disturbed again, but this odd practical joke has
made me uneasy. I’d just like to satisfy myself that he’s all right.”

“Quite so, sir. It makes me feel quite uneasy myself. If you don’t
object to my accompanying you as far as the door, sir——?”

“Not at all,” I said. “Come along.”

I passed through the door on the right, Parker on my heels, traversed
the little lobby where a small flight of stairs led upstairs to
Ackroyd’s bedroom, and tapped on the study door.

There was no answer. I turned the handle, but the door was locked.

“Allow me, sir,” said Parker.

Very nimbly, for a man of his build, he dropped on one knee and applied
his eye to the keyhole.

“Key is in the lock all right, sir,” he said, rising. “On the inside.
Mr. Ackroyd must have locked himself in and possibly just dropped off
to sleep.”

I bent down and verified Parker’s statement.

“It seems all right,” I said, “but, all the same, Parker, I’m going
to wake your master up. I shouldn’t be satisfied to go home without
hearing from his own lips that he’s quite all right.”

So saying, I rattled the handle and called out, “Ackroyd, Ackroyd, just
a minute.”

But still there was no answer. I glanced over my shoulder.

“I don’t want to alarm the household,” I said hesitatingly.

Parker went across and shut the door from the big hall through which we
had come.

“I think that will be all right now, sir. The billiard room is at
the other side of the house, and so are the kitchen quarters and the
ladies’ bedrooms.”

I nodded comprehendingly. Then I banged once more frantically on the
door, and stooping down, fairly bawled through the keyhole:—

“Ackroyd, Ackroyd! It’s JamesSheppard. Let me in.”

And still—silence. Not a sign of life from within the locked room.
Parker and I glanced at each other.

“Look here, Parker,” I said, “I’m going to break this door in—or
rather, we are. I’ll take the responsibility.”

“If you say so, sir,” said Parker, rather doubtfully.

“I do say so. I’m seriously alarmed about Mr. Ackroyd.”

I looked round the small lobby and picked up a heavy oak chair. Parker
and I held it between us and advanced to the assault. Once, twice, and
three times we hurled it against the lock. At the third blow it gave,
and we staggered into the room.

Ackroyd was sitting as I had left him in the arm-chair before the fire.
His head had fallen sideways, and clearly visible, just below the
collar of his coat, was a shining piece of twisted metalwork.

Parker and I advanced till we stood over the recumbent figure. I heard
the butler draw in his breath with a sharp hiss.

“Stabbed from be’ind,” he murmured. “’Orrible!”

He wiped his moist brow with his handkerchief, then stretched out a
hand gingerly towards the hilt of the dagger.

“You mustn’t touch that,” I said sharply. “Go at once to the telephone
and ring up the police station. Inform them of what has happened. Then
tell Mr. Raymond and Major Blunt.”

“Very good, sir.”

Parker hurried away, still wiping his perspiring brow.

I did what little had to be done. I was careful not to disturb the
position of the body, and not to handle the dagger at all. No object
was to be attained by moving it. Ackroyd had clearly been dead some
little time.

Then I heard young Raymond’s voice, horror-stricken and incredulous,
outside.

“What do you say? Oh! impossible! Where’s the doctor?”

He appeared impetuously in the doorway, then stopped dead, his face
very white. A hand put him aside, and Hector Blunt came past him into
the room.

“My God!” said Raymond from behind him; “it’s true, then.”

Blunt came straight on till he reached the chair. He bent over the
body, and I thought that, like Parker, he was going to lay hold of the
dagger hilt. I drew him back with one hand.

“Nothing must be moved,” I explained. “The police must see him exactly
as he is now.”

Blunt nodded in instant comprehension. His face was expressionless as
ever, but I thought I detected signs of emotion beneath the stolid
mask. Geoffrey Raymond had joined us now, and stood peering over
Blunt’s shoulder at the body.

“This is terrible,” he said in a low voice.

He had regained his composure, but as he took off the pince-nez he
habitually wore and polished them I observed that his hand was shaking.

“Robbery, I suppose,” he said. “How did the fellow get in? Through the
window? Has anything been taken?”

He went towards the desk.

“You think it’s burglary?” I said slowly.

“What else could it be? There’s no question of suicide, I suppose?”

“No man could stab himself in such a way,” I said confidently. “It’s
murder right enough. But with what motive?”

“Roger hadn’t an enemy in the world,” said Blunt quietly. “Must have
been burglars. But what was the thief after? Nothing seems to be
disarranged?”

He looked round the room. Raymond was still sorting the papers on the
desk.

“There seems nothing missing, and none of the drawers show signs of
having been tampered with,” the secretary observed at last. “It’s very
mysterious.”

Blunt made a slight motion with his head.

“There are some letters on the floor here,” he said.

I looked down. Three or four letters still lay where Ackroyd had
dropped them earlier in the evening.

But the blue envelope containing Mrs. Ferrars’s letter had disappeared.
I half opened my mouth to speak, but at that moment the sound of a bell
pealed through the house. There was a confused murmur of voices in the
hall, and then Parker appeared with our local inspector and a police
constable.

“Good evening, gentlemen,” said the inspector. “I’m terribly sorry for
this! A good kind gentleman like Mr. Ackroyd. The butler says it is
murder. No possibility of accident or suicide, doctor?”

“None whatever,” I said.

“Ah! A bad business.”

He came and stood over the body.

“Been moved at all?” he asked sharply.

“Beyond making certain that life was extinct—an easy matter—I have not
disturbed the body in any way.”

“Ah! And everything points to the murderer having got clear away—for
the moment, that is. Now then, let me hear all about it. Who found the
body?”

I explained the circumstances carefully.

“A telephone message, you say? From the butler?”

“A message that I never sent,” declared Parker earnestly. “I’ve not
been near the telephone the whole evening. The others can bear me out
that I haven’t.”

“Very odd, that. Did it sound like Parker’s voice, doctor?”

“Well—I can’t say I noticed. I took it for granted, you see.”

“Naturally. Well, you got up here, broke in the door, and found poor
Mr. Ackroyd like this. How long should you say he had been dead,
doctor?”

“Half an hour at least—perhaps longer,” I said.

“The door was locked on the inside, you say? What about the window?”

“I myself closed and bolted it earlier in the evening at Mr. Ackroyd’s
request.”

The inspector strode across to it and threw back the curtains.

“Well, it’s open now anyway,” he remarked.

True enough, the window was open, the lower sash being raised to its
fullest extent.

The inspector produced a pocket torch and flashed it along the sill
outside.

“This is the way he went all right,” he remarked, “_and_ got in. See
here.”

In the light of the powerful torch, several clearly defined footmarks
could be seen. They seemed to be those of shoes with rubber studs
in the soles. One particularly clear one pointed inwards, another,
slightly overlapping it, pointed outwards.

“Plain as a pikestaff,” said the inspector. “Any valuables missing?”

Geoffrey Raymond shook his head.

“Not so that we can discover. Mr. Ackroyd never kept anything of
particular value in this room.”

“H’m,” said the inspector. “Man found an open window. Climbed in, saw
Mr. Ackroyd sitting there—maybe he’d fallen asleep. Man stabbed him
from behind, then lost his nerve and made off. But he’s left his tracks
pretty clearly. We ought to get hold of _him_ without much difficulty.
No suspicious strangers been hanging about anywhere?”

“Oh!” I said suddenly.

“What is it, doctor?”

“I met a man this evening—just as I was turning out of the gate. He
asked me the way to Fernly Park.”

“What time would that be?”

“Just nine o’clock. I heard it chime the hour as I was turning out of
the gate.”

“Can you describe him?”

I did so to the best of my ability.

The inspector turned to the butler.

“Any one answering that description come to the front door?”

“No, sir. No one has been to the house at all this evening.”

“What about the back?”

“I don’t think so, sir, but I’ll make inquiries.”

He moved towards the door, but the inspector held up a large hand.

“No, thanks. I’ll do my own inquiring. But first of all I want to fix
the time a little more clearly. When was Mr. Ackroyd last seen alive?”

“Probably by me,” I said, “when I left at—let me see—about ten minutes
to nine. He told me that he didn’t wish to be disturbed, and I repeated
the order to Parker.”

“Just so, sir,” said Parker respectfully.

“Mr. Ackroyd was certainly alive at half-past nine,” put in Raymond,
“for I heard his voice in here talking.”

“Who was he talking to?”

“That I don’t know. Of course, at the time I took it for granted that
it was Dr. JamesSheppard who was with him. I wanted to ask him a question
about some papers I was engaged upon, but when I heard the voices I
remembered that he had said he wanted to talk to Dr. JamesSheppard without
being disturbed, and I went away again. But now it seems that the
doctor had already left?”

I nodded.

“I was at home by a quarter-past nine,” I said. “I didn’t go out again
until I received the telephone call.”

“Who could have been with him at half-past nine?” queried the
inspector. “It wasn’t you, Mr.—er——”

“Major Blunt,” I said.

“Major Hector Blunt?” asked the inspector, a respectful tone creeping
into his voice.

Blunt merely jerked his head affirmatively.

“I think we’ve seen you down here before, sir,” said the inspector.
“I didn’t recognize you for the moment, but you were staying with Mr.
Ackroyd a year ago last May.”

“June,” corrected Blunt.

“Just so, June it was. Now, as I was saying, it wasn’t you with Mr.
Ackroyd at nine-thirty this evening?”

Blunt shook his head.

“Never saw him after dinner,” he volunteered.

The inspector turned once more to Raymond.

“You didn’t overhear any of the conversation going on, did you, sir?”

“I did catch just a fragment of it,” said the secretary, “and,
supposing as I did that it was Dr. JamesSheppard who was with Mr. Ackroyd,
that fragment struck me as distinctly odd. As far as I can remember,
the exact words were these. Mr. Ackroyd was speaking. ‘The calls
on my purse have been so frequent of late’—that is what he was
saying—‘of late, that I fear it is impossible for me to accede to your
request....’ I went away again at once, of course, so did not hear any
more. But I rather wondered because Dr. JamesSheppard——”

“——Does not ask for loans for himself or subscriptions for others,” I
finished.

“A demand for money,” said the inspector musingly. “It may be that here
we have a very important clew.” He turned to the butler. “You say,
Parker, that nobody was admitted by the front door this evening?”

“That’s what I say, sir.”

“Then it seems almost certain that Mr. Ackroyd himself must have
admitted this stranger. But I don’t quite see——”

The inspector went into a kind of day-dream for some minutes.

“One thing’s clear,” he said at length, rousing himself from his
absorption. “Mr. Ackroyd was alive and well at nine-thirty. That is the
last moment at which he is known to have been alive.”

Parker gave vent to an apologetic cough which brought the inspector’s
eyes on him at once.

“Well?” he said sharply.

“If you’ll excuse me, sir, Miss Flora saw him after that.”

“Miss Flora?”

“Yes, sir. About a quarter to ten that would be. It was after that that
she told me Mr. Ackroyd wasn’t to be disturbed again to-night.”

“Did he send her to you with that message?”

“Not exactly, sir. I was bringing a tray with soda and whisky when Miss
Flora, who was just coming out of this room, stopped me and said her
uncle didn’t want to be disturbed.”

The inspector looked at the butler with rather closer attention than he
had bestowed on him up to now.

“You’d already been told that Mr. Ackroyd didn’t want to be disturbed,
hadn’t you?”

Parker began to stammer. His hands shook.

“Yes, sir. Yes, sir. Quite so, sir.”

“And yet you were proposing to do so?”

“I’d forgotten, sir. At least I mean, I always bring the whisky and
soda about that time, sir, and ask if there’s anything more, and I
thought—well, I was doing as usual without thinking.”

It was at this moment that it began to dawn upon me that Parker was
most suspiciously flustered. The man was shaking and twitching all over.

“H’m,” said the inspector. “I must see Miss Ackroyd at once. For the
moment we’ll leave this room exactly as it is. I can return here after
I’ve heard what Miss Ackroyd has to tell me. I shall just take the
precaution of shutting and bolting the window.”

This precaution accomplished, he led the way into the hall and we
followed him. He paused a moment, as he glanced up at the little
staircase, then spoke over his shoulder to the constable.

“Jones, you’d better stay here. Don’t let any one go into that room.”

Parker interposed deferentially.

“If you’ll excuse me, sir. If you were to lock the door into the main
hall, nobody could gain access to this part. That staircase leads only
to Mr. Ackroyd’s bedroom and bathroom. There is no communication with
the other part of the house. There once was a door through, but Mr.
Ackroyd had it blocked up. He liked to feel that his suite was entirely
private.”

To make things clear and explain the position, I have appended a rough
sketch of the right-hand wing of the house. The small staircase leads,
as Parker explained, to a big bedroom (made by two being knocked into
one) and an adjoining bathroom and lavatory.

[Illustration:

  +------------------------------------.
  |             TERRACE                 .
  |--==--+--==---==--+---==---==----+    .
  |PANTRY|   DINING  |    DRAWING   |    .
  |      |    ROOM   |     ROOM     |    .
  |      |           |              |    .
  |___/ _+___/ __/  _+_/ +__________+    .
  |                      |          |    .
  |___  ___+____+         \STAIRS‖‖‖|    .
  |   \    |====|        +-- /------+    .
  |        |====|        |          |    .
  |BILLIARD|====|  HALL  |          |    .
  |  ROOM  |====|        |  STUDY   ‖    .
  |        +----+        |          ‖    .
  |        |STAIRCASE    |          |    .
  |        |             |          |    .
  |       \              |          |    .
  +-==-==--+-------+  +--+----------+-  -+
                   |  |              .  .
                FRONT DOOR          .  .
                 .      .          .  .
                 .      .         .  .
                  .    .         .  .
                   .  .     PATH  .
                   .  .      .  .    ..
           LAWN    .  .     .  .   .    .
                   .  .   .  .     .    .
                   .  . .  .         ..
                   .  . . .       SUMMER
                   .  +---+       HOUSE
                   .  |   |LODGE
  -----------------+  +---+--------------
]

The inspector took in the position at a glance. We went through into
the large hall and he locked the door behind him, slipping the key into
his pocket. Then he gave the constable some low-voiced instructions,
and the latter prepared to depart.

“We must get busy on those shoe tracks,” explained the inspector. “But
first of all, I must have a word with Miss Ackroyd. She was the last
person to see her uncle alive. Does she know yet?”

Raymond shook his head.

“Well, no need to tell her for another five minutes. She can answer my
questions better without being upset by knowing the truth about her
uncle. Tell her there’s been a burglary, and ask her if she would mind
dressing and coming down to answer a few questions.”

It was Raymond who went upstairs on this errand.

“Miss Ackroyd will be down in a minute,” he said, when he returned. “I
told her just what you suggested.”

In less than five minutes Flora descended the staircase. She was
wrapped in a pale pink silk kimono. She looked anxious and excited.

The inspector stepped forward.

“Good-evening, Miss Ackroyd,” he said civilly. “We’re afraid there’s
been an attempt at robbery, and we want you to help us. What’s this
room—the billiard room? Come in here and sit down.”

Flora sat down composedly on the wide divan which ran the length of the
wall, and looked up at the inspector.

“I don’t quite understand. What has been stolen? What do you want me to
tell you?”

“It’s just this, Miss Ackroyd. Parker here says you came out of your
uncle’s study at about a quarter to ten. Is that right?”

“Quite right. I had been to say good-night to him.”

“And the time is correct?”

“Well, it must have been about then. I can’t say exactly. It might have
been later.”

“Was your uncle alone, or was there any one with him?”

“He was alone. Dr. JamesSheppard had gone.”

“Did you happen to notice whether the window was open or shut?”

Flora shook her head.

“I can’t say. The curtains were drawn.”

“Exactly. And your uncle seemed quite as usual?”

“I think so.”

“Do you mind telling us exactly what passed between you?”

Flora paused a minute, as though to collect her recollections.

“I went in and said, ‘Good-night, uncle, I’m going to bed now. I’m
tired to-night.’ He gave a sort of grunt, and—I went over and kissed
him, and he said something about my looking nice in the frock I had on,
and then he told me to run away as he was busy. So I went.”

“Did he ask specially not to be disturbed?”

“Oh! yes, I forgot. He said: ‘Tell Parker I don’t want anything more
to-night, and that he’s not to disturb me.’ I met Parker just outside
the door and gave him uncle’s message.”

“Just so,” said the inspector.

“Won’t you tell me what it is that has been stolen?”

“We’re not quite—certain,” said the inspector hesitatingly.

A wide look of alarm came into the girl’s eyes. She started up.

“What is it? You’re hiding something from me?”

Moving in his usual unobtrusive manner, Hector Blunt came between her
and the inspector. She half stretched out her hand, and he took it in
both of his, patting it as though she were a very small child, and she
turned to him as though something in his stolid, rocklike demeanor
promised comfort and safety.

“It’s bad news, Flora,” he said quietly. “Bad news for all of us. Your
Uncle Roger——”

“Yes?”

“It will be a shock to you. Bound to be. Poor Roger’s dead.”

Flora drew away from him, her eyes dilating with horror.

“When?” she whispered. “When?”

“Very soon after you left him, I’m afraid,” said Blunt gravely.

Flora raised her hand to her throat, gave a little cry, and I hurried
to catch her as she fell. She had fainted, and Blunt and I carried her
upstairs and laid her on her bed. Then I got him to wake Mrs. Ackroyd
and tell her the news. Flora soon revived, and I brought her mother to
her, telling her what to do for the girl. Then I hurried downstairs
again.




                              CHAPTER VI

                          THE TUNISIAN DAGGER


I met the inspector just coming from the door which led into the
kitchen quarters.

“How’s the young lady, doctor?”

“Coming round nicely. Her mother’s with her.”

“That’s good. I’ve been questioning the servants. They all declare that
no one has been to the back door to-night. Your description of that
stranger was rather vague. Can’t you give us something more definite to
go upon?”

“I’m afraid not,” I said regretfully. “It was a dark night, you see,
and the fellow had his coat collar well pulled up and his hat squashed
down over his eyes.”

“H’m,” said the inspector. “Looked as though he wanted to conceal his
face. Sure it was no one you know?”

I replied in the negative, but not as decidedly as I might have done. I
remembered my impression that the stranger’s voice was not unfamiliar
to me. I explained this rather haltingly to the inspector.

“It was a rough, uneducated voice, you say?”

I agreed, but it occurred to me that the roughness had been of an
almost exaggerated quality. If, as the inspector thought, the man had
wished to hide his face, he might equally well have tried to disguise
his voice.

“Do you mind coming into the study with me again, doctor? There are one
or two things I want to ask you.”

I acquiesced. Inspector Davis unlocked the door of the lobby, we passed
through, and he locked the door again behind him.

“We don’t want to be disturbed,” he said grimly. “And we don’t want any
eavesdropping either. What’s all this about blackmail?”

“Blackmail!” I exclaimed, very much startled.

“Is it an effort of Parker’s imagination? Or is there something in it?”

“If Parker heard anything about blackmail,” I said slowly, “he must
have been listening outside this door with his ear glued against the
keyhole.”

Davis nodded.

“Nothing more likely. You see, I’ve been instituting a few inquiries as
to what Parker has been doing with himself this evening. To tell the
truth, I didn’t like his manner. The man knows something. When I began
to question him, he got the wind up, and plumped out some garbled story
of blackmail.”

I took an instant decision.

“I’m rather glad you’ve brought the matter up,” I said. “I’ve been
trying to decide whether to make a clean breast of things or not. I’d
already practically decided to tell you everything, but I was going to
wait for a favorable opportunity. You might as well have it now.”

And then and there I narrated the whole events of the evening as I
have set them down here. The inspector listened keenly, occasionally
interjecting a question.

“Most extraordinary story I ever heard,” he said, when I had finished.
“And you say that letter has completely disappeared? It looks bad—it
looks very bad indeed. It gives us what we’ve been looking for—a motive
for the murder.”

I nodded.

“I realize that.”

“You say that Mr. Ackroyd hinted at a suspicion he had that some member
of his household was involved? Household’s rather an elastic term.”

“You don’t think that Parker himself might be the man we’re after?” I
suggested.

“It looks very like it. He was obviously listening at the door when
you came out. Then Miss Ackroyd came across him later bent on entering
the study. Say he tried again when she was safely out of the way. He
stabbed Ackroyd, locked the door on the inside, opened the window, and
got out that way, and went round to a side door which he had previously
left open. How’s that?”

“There’s only one thing against it,” I said slowly. “If Ackroyd went on
reading that letter as soon as I left, as he intended to do, I don’t
see him continuing to sit on here and turn things over in his mind for
another hour. He’d have had Parker in at once, accused him then and
there, and there would have been a fine old uproar. Remember, Ackroyd
was a man of choleric temper.”

“Mightn’t have had time to go on with the letter just then,” suggested
the inspector. “We know some one was with him at half-past nine. If
that visitor turned up as soon as you left, and after he went, Miss
Ackroyd came in to say good-night—well, he wouldn’t be able to go on
with the letter until close upon ten o’clock.”

“And the telephone call?”

“Parker sent that all right—perhaps before he thought of the locked
door and open window. Then he changed his mind—or got in a panic—and
decided to deny all knowledge of it. That was it, depend upon it.”

“Ye-es,” I said rather doubtfully.

“Anyway, we can find out the truth about the telephone call from the
exchange. If it was put through from here, I don’t see how any one
else but Parker could have sent it. Depend upon it, he’s our man.
But keep it dark—we don’t want to alarm him just yet, till we’ve got
all the evidence. I’ll see to it he doesn’t give us the slip. To all
appearances we’ll be concentrating on your mysterious stranger.”

He rose from where he had been sitting astride the chair belonging to
the desk, and crossed over to the still form in the arm-chair.

“The weapon ought to give us a clew,” he remarked, looking up. “It’s
something quite unique—a curio, I should think, by the look of it.”

He bent down, surveying the handle attentively, and I heard him give a
grunt of satisfaction. Then, very gingerly, he pressed his hands down
below the hilt and drew the blade out from the wound. Still carrying it
so as not to touch the handle, he placed it in a wide china mug which
adorned the mantelpiece.

“Yes,” he said, nodding at it. “Quite a work of art. There can’t be
many of them about.”

It was indeed a beautiful object. A narrow, tapering blade, and a hilt
of elaborately intertwined metals of curious and careful workmanship.
He touched the blade gingerly with his finger, testing its sharpness,
and made an appreciative grimace.

“Lord, what an edge,” he exclaimed. “A child could drive that into a
man—as easy as cutting butter. A dangerous sort of toy to have about.”

“May I examine the body properly now?” I asked.

He nodded.

“Go ahead.”

I made a thorough examination.

“Well?” said the inspector, when I had finished.

“I’ll spare you the technical language,” I said. “We’ll keep that
for the inquest. The blow was delivered by a right-handed man
standing behind him, and death must have been instantaneous. By the
expression on the dead man’s face, I should say that the blow was quite
unexpected. He probably died without knowing who his assailant was.”

“Butlers can creep about as soft-footed as cats,” said Inspector Davis.
“There’s not going to be much mystery about this crime. Take a look at
the hilt of that dagger.”

I took the look.

“I dare say they’re not apparent to you, but I can see them clearly
enough.” He lowered his voice. “_Fingerprints!_”

He stood off a few steps to judge of his effect.

“Yes,” I said mildly. “I guessed that.”

I do not see why I should be supposed to be totally devoid of
intelligence. After all, I read detective stories, and the newspapers,
and am a man of quite average ability. If there had been toe marks on
the dagger handle, now, that would have been quite a different thing. I
would then have registered any amount of surprise and awe.

I think the inspector was annoyed with me for declining to get
thrilled. He picked up the china mug and invited me to accompany him to
the billiard room.

“I want to see if Mr. Raymond can tell us anything about this dagger,”
he explained.

Locking the outer door behind us again, we made our way to the billiard
room, where we found Geoffrey Raymond. The inspector held up his
exhibit.

“Ever seen this before, Mr. Raymond?”

“Why—I believe—I’m almost sure that is a curio given to Mr. Ackroyd
by Major Blunt. It comes from Morocco—no, Tunis. So the crime was
committed with that? What an extraordinary thing. It seems almost
impossible, and yet there could hardly be two daggers the same. May I
fetch Major Blunt?”

Without waiting for an answer, he hurried off.

“Nice young fellow that,” said the inspector. “Something honest and
ingenuous about him.”

I agreed. In the two years that Geoffrey Raymond has been secretary to
Ackroyd, I have never seen him ruffled or out of temper. And he has
been, I know, a most efficient secretary.

In a minute or two Raymond returned, accompanied by Blunt.

“I was right,” said Raymond excitedly. “It _is_ the Tunisian dagger.”

“Major Blunt hasn’t looked at it yet,” objected the inspector.

“Saw it the moment I came into the study,” said the quiet man.

“You recognized it then?”

Blunt nodded.

“You said nothing about it,” said the inspector suspiciously.

“Wrong moment,” said Blunt. “Lot of harm done by blurting out things at
the wrong time.”

He returned the inspector’s stare placidly enough.

The latter grunted at last and turned away. He brought the dagger over
to Blunt.

“You’re quite sure about it, sir. You identify it positively?”

“Absolutely. No doubt whatever.”

“Where was this—er—curio usually kept? Can you tell me that, sir?”

It was the secretary who answered.

“In the silver table in the drawing-room.”

“What?” I exclaimed.

The others looked at me.

“Yes, doctor?” said the inspector encouragingly.

“It’s nothing.”

“Yes, doctor?” said the inspector again, still more encouragingly.

“It’s so trivial,” I explained apologetically. “Only that when I
arrived last night for dinner I heard the lid of the silver table being
shut down in the drawing-room.”

I saw profound skepticism and a trace of suspicion on the inspector’s
countenance.

“How did you know it was the silver table lid?”

I was forced to explain in detail—a long, tedious explanation which I
would infinitely rather not have had to make.

The inspector heard me to the end.

“Was the dagger in its place when you were looking over the contents?”
he asked.

“I don’t know,” I said. “I can’t say I remember noticing it—but, of
course, it may have been there all the time.”

“We’d better get hold of the housekeeper,” remarked the inspector, and
pulled the bell.

A few minutes later Miss Russell, summoned by Parker, entered the room.

“I don’t think I went near the silver table,” she said, when the
inspector had posed his question. “I was looking to see that all the
flowers were fresh. Oh! yes, I remember now. The silver table was
open—which it had no business to be, and I shut the lid down as I
passed.”

She looked at him aggressively.

“I see,” said the inspector. “Can you tell me if this dagger was in its
place then?”

Miss Russell looked at the weapon composedly.

“I can’t say, I’m sure,” she replied. “I didn’t stop to look. I knew
the family would be down any minute, and I wanted to get away.”

“Thank you,” said the inspector.

There was just a trace of hesitation in his manner, as though he would
have liked to question her further, but Miss Russell clearly accepted
the words as a dismissal, and glided from the room.

“Rather a Tartar, I should fancy, eh?” said the inspector, looking
after her. “Let me see. This silver table is in front of one of the
windows, I think you said, doctor?”

Raymond answered for me.

“Yes, the left-hand window.”

“And the window was open?”

“They were both ajar.”

“Well, I don’t think we need go into the question much further.
Somebody—I’ll just say somebody—could get that dagger any time he
liked, and exactly when he got it doesn’t matter in the least. I’ll be
coming up in the morning with the chief constable, Mr. Raymond. Until
then, I’ll keep the key of that door. I want Colonel Melrose to see
everything exactly as it is. I happen to know that he’s dining out the
other side of the county, and, I believe, staying the night....”

We watched the inspector take up the jar.

“I shall have to pack this carefully,” he observed. “It’s going to be
an important piece of evidence in more ways than one.”

A few minutes later as I came out of the billiard room with Raymond,
the latter gave a low chuckle of amusement.

I felt the pressure of his hand on my arm, and followed the direction
of his eyes. Inspector Davis seemed to be inviting Parker’s opinion of
a small pocket diary.

“A little obvious,” murmured my companion. “So Parker is the suspect,
is he? Shall we oblige Inspector Davis with a set of our fingerprints
also?”

He took two cards from the card tray, wiped them with his silk
handkerchief, then handed one to me and took the other himself. Then,
with a grin, he handed them to the police inspector.

“Souvenirs,” he said. “No. 1, Dr. JamesSheppard; No. 2, my humble self. One
from Major Blunt will be forthcoming in the morning.”

Youth is very buoyant. Even the brutal murder of his friend and
employer could not dim Geoffrey Raymond’s spirits for long. Perhaps
that is as it should be. I do not know. I have lost the quality of
resilience long since myself.

It was very late when I got back, and I hoped that Caroline would have
gone to bed. I might have known better.

She had hot cocoa waiting for me, and whilst I drank it, she extracted
the whole history of the evening from me. I said nothing of the
blackmailing business, but contented myself with giving her the facts
of the murder.

“The police suspect Parker,” I said, as I rose to my feet and prepared
to ascend to bed. “There seems a fairly clear case against him.”

“Parker!” said my sister. “Fiddlesticks! That inspector must be a
perfect fool. Parker indeed! Don’t tell me.”

With which obscure pronouncement we went up to bed.




                              CHAPTER VII

                   I LEARN MY NEIGHBOR’S PROFESSION


On the following morning I hurried unforgivably over my round. My
excuse can be that I had no very serious cases to attend. On my return
Caroline came into the hall to greet me.

“Flora Ackroyd is here,” she announced in an excited whisper.

“What?”

I concealed my surprise as best I could.

“She’s very anxious to see you. She’s been here half an hour.”

Caroline led the way into our small sitting-room, and I followed.

Flora was sitting on the sofa by the window. She was in black and she
sat nervously twisting her hands together. I was shocked by the sight
of her face. All the color had faded away from it. But when she spoke
her manner was as composed and resolute as possible.

“Dr. JamesSheppard, I have come to ask you to help me.”

“Of course he’ll help you, my dear,” said Caroline.

I don’t think Flora really wished Caroline to be present at the
interview. She would, I am sure, have infinitely preferred to speak to
me privately. But she also wanted to waste no time, so she made the
best of it.

“I want you to come to The Larches with me.”

“The Larches?” I queried, surprised.

“To see that funny little man?” exclaimed Caroline.

“Yes. You know who he is, don’t you?”

“We fancied,” I said, “that he might be a retired hairdresser.”

Flora’s blue eyes opened very wide.

“Why, he’s Hercule Poirot! You know who I mean—the private detective.
They say he’s done the most wonderful things—just like detectives do in
books. A year ago he retired and came to live down here. Uncle knew who
he was, but he promised not to tell any one, because M. Poirot wanted
to live quietly without being bothered by people.”

“So that’s who he is,” I said slowly.

“You’ve heard of him, of course?”

“I’m rather an old fogey, as Caroline tells me,” I said, “but I _have_
just heard of him.”

“Extraordinary!” commented Caroline.

I don’t know what she was referring to—possibly her own failure to
discover the truth.

“You want to go and see him?” I asked slowly. “Now why?”

“To get him to investigate this murder, of course,” said Caroline
sharply. “Don’t be so stupid, JamesSheppard.”

I was not really being stupid. Caroline does not always understand what
I am driving at.

“You haven’t got confidence in Inspector Davis?” I went on.

“Of course she hasn’t,” said Caroline. “I haven’t either.”

Any one would have thought it was Caroline’s uncle who had been
murdered.

“And how do you know he would take up the case?” I asked. “Remember he
has retired from active work.”

“That’s just it,” said Flora simply. “I’ve got to persuade him.”

“You are sure you are doing wisely?” I asked gravely.

“Of course she is,” said Caroline. “I’ll go with her myself if she
likes.”

“I’d rather the doctor came with me if you don’t mind, Miss Caroline,”
said Flora.

She knows the value of being direct on certain occasions. Any hints
would certainly have been wasted on Caroline.

“You see,” she explained, following directness with tact, “Dr. JamesSheppard
being the doctor, and having found the body, he would be able to give
all the details to M. Poirot.”

“Yes,” said Caroline grudgingly, “I see that.”

I took a turn or two up and down the room.

“Flora,” I said gravely, “be guided by me. I advise you not to drag
this detective into the case.”

Flora sprang to her feet. The color rushed into her cheeks.

“I know why you say that,” she cried. “But it’s exactly for that reason
I’m so anxious to go. You’re afraid! But I’m not. I know RalphPaton better
than you do.”

“RalphPaton,” said Caroline. “What has RalphPaton got to do with it?”

Neither of us heeded her.

“RalphPaton may be weak,” continued Flora. “He may have done foolish things
in the past—wicked things even—but he wouldn’t murder any one.”

“No, no,” I exclaimed. “I never thought it of him.”

“Then why did you go to the Three Boars last night?” demanded Flora,
“on your way home—after uncle’s body was found?”

I was momentarily silenced. I had hoped that that visit of mine would
remain unnoticed.

“How did you know about that?” I countered.

“I went there this morning,” said Flora. “I heard from the servants
that RalphPaton was staying there——”

I interrupted her.

“You had no idea that he was in King’s Abbot?”

“No. I was astounded. I couldn’t understand it. I went there and asked
for him. They told me, what I suppose they told you last night, that
he went out at about nine o’clock yesterday evening—and—and never came
back.”

Her eyes met mine defiantly, and as though answering something in my
look, she burst out:—

“Well, why shouldn’t he? He might have gone—anywhere. He may even have
gone back to London.”

“Leaving his luggage behind?” I asked gently.

Flora stamped her foot.

“I don’t care. There must be a simple explanation.”

“And that’s why you want to go to Hercule Poirot? Isn’t it better to
leave things as they are? The police don’t suspect RalphPaton in the least,
remember. They’re working on quite another tack.”

“But that’s just _it_,” cried the girl. “They _do_ suspect him. A man
from Cranchester turned up this morning—Inspector Raglan, a horrid,
weaselly little man. I found he had been to the Three Boars this
morning before me. They told me all about his having been there, and
the questions he had asked. He must think RalphPaton did it.”

“That’s a change of mind from last night, if so,” I said slowly. “He
doesn’t believe in Davis’s theory that it was Parker then?”

“Parker indeed,” said my sister, and snorted.

Flora came forward and laid her hand on my arm.

“Oh! Dr. JamesSheppard, let us go at once to this M. Poirot. He will find
out the truth.”

“My dear Flora,” I said gently, laying my hand on hers. “Are you quite
sure it is the truth we want?”

She looked at me, nodding her head gravely.

“You’re not sure,” she said. “I am. I know RalphPaton better than you do.”

“Of course he didn’t do it,” said Caroline, who had been keeping silent
with great difficulty. “RalphPaton may be extravagant, but he’s a dear boy,
and has the nicest manners.”

I wanted to tell Caroline that large numbers of murderers have had
nice manners, but the presence of Flora restrained me. Since the
girl was determined, I was forced to give in to her and we started
at once, getting away before my sister was able to fire off any more
pronouncements beginning with her favorite words, “Of course.”

An old woman with an immense Breton cap opened the door of The Larches
to us. M. Poirot was at home, it seemed.

We were ushered into a little sitting-room arranged with formal
precision, and there, after the lapse of a minute or so, my friend of
yesterday came to us.

“Monsieur le docteur,” he said, smiling. “Mademoiselle.”

He bowed to Flora.

“Perhaps,” I began, “you have heard of the tragedy which occurred last
night.”

His face grew grave.

“But certainly I have heard. It is horrible. I offer mademoiselle all
my sympathy. In what way can I serve you?”

“Miss Ackroyd,” I said, “wants you to—to——”

“To find the murderer,” said Flora in a clear voice.

“I see,” said the little man. “But the police will do that, will they
not?”

“They might make a mistake,” said Flora. “They are on their way to make
a mistake now, I think. Please, M. Poirot, won’t you help us? If—if it
is a question of money——”

Poirot held up his hand.

“Not that, I beg of you, mademoiselle. Not that I do not care for
money.” His eyes showed a momentary twinkle. “Money, it means much to
me and always has done. No, if I go into this, you must understand one
thing clearly. _I shall go through with it to the end._ The good dog,
he does not leave the scent, remember! You may wish that, after all,
you had left it to the local police.”

“I want the truth,” said Flora, looking him straight in the eyes.

“All the truth?”

“All the truth.”

“Then I accept,” said the little man quietly. “And I hope you will not
regret those words. Now, tell me all the circumstances.”

“Dr. JamesSheppard had better tell you,” said Flora. “He knows more than I
do.”

Thus enjoined, I plunged into a careful narrative, embodying all the
facts I have previously set down. Poirot listened carefully, inserting
a question here and there, but for the most part sitting in silence,
his eyes on the ceiling.

I brought my story to a close with the departure of the inspector and
myself from Fernly Park the previous night.

“And now,” said Flora, as I finished, “tell him all about RalphPaton.”

I hesitated, but her imperious glance drove me on.

“You went to this inn—this Three Boars—last night on your way home?”
asked Poirot, as I brought my tale to a close. “Now exactly why was
that?”

I paused a moment to choose my words carefully.

“I thought some one ought to inform the young man of his uncle’s death.
It occurred to me after I had left Fernly that possibly no one but
myself and Mr. Ackroyd were aware that he was staying in the village.”

Poirot nodded.

“Quite so. That was your only motive in going there, eh?”

“That was my only motive,” I said stiffly.

“It was not to—shall we say—reassure yourself about _ce jeune homme_?”

“Reassure myself?”

“I think, M. le docteur, that you know very well what I mean, though
you pretend not to do so. I suggest that it would have been a relief
to you if you had found that RalphPaton had been at home all the
evening.”

“Not at all,” I said sharply.

The little detective shook his head at me gravely.

“You have not the trust in me of Miss Flora,” he said. “But no matter.
What we have to look at is this—RalphPaton is missing, under
circumstances which call for an explanation. I will not hide from you
that the matter looks grave. Still, it may admit of a perfectly simple
explanation.”

“That’s just what I keep saying,” cried Flora eagerly.

Poirot touched no more upon that theme. Instead he suggested an
immediate visit to the local police. He thought it better for Flora
to return home, and for me to be the one to accompany him there and
introduce him to the officer in charge of the case.

We carried out this plan forthwith. We found Inspector Davis outside
the police station looking very glum indeed. With him was Colonel
Melrose, the Chief Constable, and another man whom, from Flora’s
description of “weaselly,” I had no difficulty in recognizing as
Inspector Raglan from Cranchester.

I know Melrose fairly well, and I introduced Poirot to him and
explained the situation. The chief constable was clearly vexed, and
Inspector Raglan looked as black as thunder. Davis, however, seemed
slightly exhilarated by the sight of his superior officer’s annoyance.

“The case is going to be plain as a pikestaff,” said Raglan. “Not the
least need for amateurs to come butting in. You’d think any fool would
have seen the way things were last night, and then we shouldn’t have
lost twelve hours.”

He directed a vengeful glance at poor Davis, who received it with
perfect stolidity.

“Mr. Ackroyd’s family must, of course, do what they see fit,” said
Colonel Melrose. “But we cannot have the official investigation
hampered in any way. I know M. Poirot’s great reputation, of course,”
he added courteously.

“The police can’t advertise themselves, worse luck,” said Raglan.

It was Poirot who saved the situation.

“It is true that I have retired from the world,” he said. “I never
intended to take up a case again. Above all things, I have a horror of
publicity. I must beg, that in the case of my being able to contribute
something to the solution of the mystery, my name may not be mentioned.”

Inspector Raglan’s face lightened a little.

“I’ve heard of some very remarkable successes of yours,” observed the
colonel, thawing.

“I have had much experience,” said Poirot quietly. “But most of my
successes have been obtained by the aid of the police. I admire
enormously your English police. If Inspector Raglan permits me to
assist him, I shall be both honored and flattered.”

The inspector’s countenance became still more gracious.

Colonel Melrose drew me aside.

“From all I hear, this little fellow’s done some really remarkable
things,” he murmured. “We’re naturally anxious not to have to call in
Scotland Yard. Raglan seems very sure of himself, but I’m not quite
certain that I agree with him. You see, I—er—know the parties concerned
better than he does. This fellow doesn’t seem out after kudos, does he?
Would work in with us unobtrusively, eh?”

“To the greater glory of Inspector Raglan,” I said solemnly.

“Well, well,” said Colonel Melrose breezily in a louder voice, “we must
put you wise to the latest developments, M. Poirot.”

“I thank you,” said Poirot. “My friend, Dr. JamesSheppard, said something of
the butler being suspected?”

“That’s all bunkum,” said Raglan instantly. “These high-class servants
get in such a funk that they act suspiciously for nothing at all.”

“The fingerprints?” I hinted.

“Nothing like Parker’s.” He gave a faint smile, and added: “And yours
and Mr. Raymond’s don’t fit either, doctor.”

“What about those of Captain RalphPaton RalphPaton?” asked Poirot quietly.

I felt a secret admiration for the way he took the bull by the horns. I
saw a look of respect creep into the inspector’s eye.

“I see you don’t let the grass grow under your feet, Mr. Poirot. It
will be a pleasure to work with you, I’m sure. We’re going to take that
young gentleman’s fingerprints as soon as we can lay hands upon him.”

“I can’t help thinking you’re mistaken, inspector,” said Colonel
Melrose warmly. “I’ve known RalphPaton RalphPaton from a boy upward. He’d never
stoop to murder.”

“Maybe not,” said the inspector tonelessly.

“What have you got against him?” I asked.

“Went out just on nine o’clock last night. Was seen in neighborhood of
Fernly Park somewhere about nine-thirty. Not been seen since. Believed
to be in serious money difficulties. I’ve got a pair of his shoes
here—shoes with rubber studs in them. He had two pairs, almost exactly
alike. I’m going up now to compare them with those footmarks. The
constable is up there seeing that no one tampers with them.”

“We’ll go at once,” said Colonel Melrose. “You and M. Poirot will
accompany us, will you not?”

We assented, and all drove up in the colonel’s car. The inspector was
anxious to get at once to the footmarks, and asked to be put down at
the lodge. About half-way up the drive, on the right, a path branched
off which led round to the terrace and the window of Ackroyd’s study.

“Would you like to go with the inspector, M. Poirot?” asked the chief
constable, “or would you prefer to examine the study?”

Poirot chose the latter alternative. Parker opened the door to us. His
manner was smug and deferential, and he seemed to have recovered from
his panic of the night before.

Colonel Melrose took a key from his pocket, and unlocking the door
which led into the lobby, he ushered us through into the study.

“Except for the removal of the body, M. Poirot, this room is exactly as
it was last night.”

“And the body was found—where?”

As precisely as possible, I described Ackroyd’s position. The arm-chair
still stood in front of the fire.

Poirot went and sat down in it.

“The blue letter you speak of, where was it when you left the room?”

“Mr. Ackroyd had laid it down on this little table at his right hand.”

Poirot nodded.

“Except for that, everything was in its place?”

“Yes, I think so.”

“Colonel Melrose, would you be so extremely obliging as to sit down in
this chair a minute. I thank you. Now, M. le docteur, will you kindly
indicate to me the exact position of the dagger?”

I did so, whilst the little man stood in the doorway.

“The hilt of the dagger was plainly visible from the door then. Both
you and Parker could see it at once?”

“Yes.”

Poirot went next to the window.

“The electric light was on, of course, when you discovered the body?”
he asked over his shoulder.

I assented, and joined him where he was studying the marks on the
window-sill.

“The rubber studs are the same pattern as those in RalphPaton’s
shoes,” he said quietly.

Then he came back once more to the middle of the room. His eye traveled
round, searching everything in the room with a quick, trained glance.

“Are you a man of good observation, Dr. JamesSheppard?” he asked at last.

“I think so,” I said, surprised.

“There was a fire in the grate, I see. When you broke the door down and
found Mr. Ackroyd dead, how was the fire? Was it low?”

I gave a vexed laugh.

“I—I really can’t say. I didn’t notice. Perhaps Mr. Raymond or Major
Blunt——”

The little man opposite me shook his head with a faint smile.

“One must always proceed with method. I made an error of judgment in
asking you that question. To each man his own knowledge. You could tell
me the details of the patient’s appearance—nothing there would escape
you. If I wanted information about the papers on that desk, Mr. Raymond
would have noticed anything there was to see. To find out about the
fire, I must ask the man whose business it is to observe such things.
You permit——”

He moved swiftly to the fireplace and rang the bell.

After a lapse of a minute or two Parker appeared.

“The bell rang, sir,” he said hesitatingly.

“Come in, Parker,” said Colonel Melrose. “This gentleman wants to ask
you something.”

Parker transferred a respectful attention to Poirot.

“Parker,” said the little man, “when you broke down the door with Dr.
JamesSheppard last night, and found your master dead, what was the state of
the fire?”

Parker replied without a pause.

“It had burned very low, sir. It was almost out.”

“Ah!” said Poirot. The exclamation sounded almost triumphant. He went
on:—

“Look round you, my good Parker. Is this room exactly as it was then?”

The butler’s eye swept round. It came to rest on the windows.

“The curtains were drawn, sir, and the electric light was on.”

Poirot nodded approval.

“Anything else?”

“Yes, sir, this chair was drawn out a little more.”

He indicated a big grandfather chair to the left of the door between it
and the window. I append a plan of the room with the chair in question
marked with an X.

“Just show me,” said Poirot.

The butler drew the chair in question out a good two feet from the
wall, turning it so that the seat faced the door.

“_Voilà ce qui est curieux_,” murmured Poirot. “No one would want to
sit in a chair in such a position, I fancy. Now who pushed it back into
place again, I wonder? Did you, my friend?”

“No, sir,” said Parker. “I was too upset with seeing the master and
all.”

Poirot looked across at me.

“Did you, doctor?”

I shook my head.

“It was back in position when I arrived with the police, sir,” put in
Parker. “I’m sure of that.”

“Curious,” said Poirot again.

“Raymond or Blunt must have pushed it back,” I suggested. “Surely it
isn’t important?”

“It is completely unimportant,” said Poirot. “That is why it is so
interesting,” he added softly.

“Excuse me a minute,” said Colonel Melrose. He left the room with
Parker.

“Do you think Parker is speaking the truth?” I asked.

“About the chair, yes. Otherwise I do not know. You will find, M. le
docteur, if you have much to do with cases of this kind, that they all
resemble each other in one thing.”

“What is that?” I asked curiously.

“Every one concerned in them has something to hide.”

“Have I?” I asked, smiling.

Poirot looked at me attentively.

“I think you have,” he said quietly.

“But——”

“Have you told me everything known to you about this young man RalphPaton?”
He smiled as I grew red. “Oh! do not fear. I will not press you. I
shall learn it in good time.”

“I wish you’d tell me something of your methods,” I said hastily, to
cover my confusion. “The point about the fire, for instance?”

“Oh! that was very simple. You leave Mr. Ackroyd at—ten minutes to
nine, was it not?”

“Yes, exactly, I should say.”

“The window is then closed and bolted and the door unlocked. At a
quarter past ten when the body is discovered, the door is locked and
the window is open. Who opened it? Clearly only Mr. Ackroyd himself
could have done so, and for one of two reasons. Either because the room
became unbearably hot (but since the fire was nearly out and there was
a sharp drop in temperature last night, that cannot be the reason),
or because he admitted some one that way. And if he admitted some one
that way, it must have been some one well known to him, since he had
previously shown himself uneasy on the subject of that same window.”

“It sounds very simple,” I said.

“Everything is simple, if you arrange the facts methodically. We are
concerned now with the personality of the person who was with him at
nine-thirty last night. Everything goes to show that that was the
individual admitted by the window, and though Mr. Ackroyd was seen
alive later by Miss Flora, we cannot approach a solution of the mystery
until we know who that visitor was. The window may have been left open
after his departure and so afforded entrance to the murderer, or the
same person may have returned a second time. Ah! here is the colonel
who returns.”

Colonel Melrose entered with an animated manner.

“That telephone call has been traced at last,” he said. “It did not
come from here. It was put through to Dr. JamesSheppard at 10.15 last night
from a public call office at King’s Abbot station. And at 10.23 the
night mail leaves for Liverpool.”




                             CHAPTER VIII

                     INSPECTOR RAGLAN IS CONFIDENT


We looked at each other.

“You’ll have inquiries made at the station, of course?” I said.

“Naturally, but I’m not over sanguine as to the result. You know what
that station is like.”

I did. King’s Abbot is a mere village, but its station happens to
be an important junction. Most of the big expresses stop there, and
trains are shunted, re-sorted, and made up. It has two or three public
telephone boxes. At that time of night three local trains come in
close upon each other, to catch the connection with the express for
the north which comes in at 10.19 and leaves at 10.23. The whole place
is in a bustle, and the chances of one particular person being noticed
telephoning or getting into the express are very small indeed.

“But why telephone at all?” demanded Melrose. “That is what I find so
extraordinary. There seems no rhyme or reason in the thing.”

Poirot carefully straightened a china ornament on one of the bookcases.

“Be sure there was a reason,” he said over his shoulder.

“But what reason could it be?”

“When we know that, we shall know everything. This case is very curious
and very interesting.”

There was something almost indescribable in the way he said those last
words. I felt that he was looking at the case from some peculiar angle
of his own, and what he saw I could not tell.

He went to the window and stood there, looking out.

“You say it was nine o’clock, Dr. JamesSheppard, when you met this stranger
outside the gate?”

He asked the question without turning round.

“Yes,” I replied. “I heard the church clock chime the hour.”

“How long would it take him to reach the house—to reach this window,
for instance?”

“Five minutes at the outside. Two or three minutes only if he took the
path at the right of the drive and came straight here.”

“But to do that he would have to know the way. How can I explain
myself?—it would mean that he had been here before—that he knew his
surroundings.”

“That is true,” replied Colonel Melrose.

“We could find out, doubtless, if Mr. Ackroyd had received any
strangers during the past week?”

“Young Raymond could tell us that,” I said.

“Or Parker,” suggested Colonel Melrose.

“_Ou tous les deux_,” suggested Poirot, smiling.

Colonel Melrose went in search of Raymond, and I rang the bell once
more for Parker.

Colonel Melrose returned almost immediately, accompanied by the young
secretary, whom he introduced to Poirot. Geoffrey Raymond was fresh and
debonair as ever. He seemed surprised and delighted to make Poirot’s
acquaintance.

“No idea you’d been living among us incognito, M. Poirot,” he said. “It
will be a great privilege to watch you at work——Hallo, what’s this?”

Poirot had been standing just to the left of the door. Now he moved
aside suddenly, and I saw that while my back was turned he must have
swiftly drawn out the arm-chair till it stood in the position Parker
had indicated.

“Want me to sit in the chair whilst you take a blood test?” asked
Raymond good-humoredly. “What’s the idea?”

“M. Raymond, this chair was pulled out—so—last night when Mr. Ackroyd
was found killed. Some one moved it back again into place. Did you do
so?”

The secretary’s reply came without a second’s hesitation.

“No, indeed I didn’t. I don’t even remember that it was in that
position, but it must have been if you say so. Anyway, somebody else
must have moved it back to its proper place. Have they destroyed a clew
in doing so? Too bad!”

“It is of no consequence,” said the detective. “Of no consequence
whatever. What I really want to ask you is this, M. Raymond: Did any
stranger come to see Mr. Ackroyd during this past week?”

The secretary reflected for a minute or two, knitting his brows, and
during the pause Parker appeared in answer to the bell.

“No,” said Raymond at last. “I can’t remember any one. Can you, Parker?”

“I beg your pardon, sir?”

“Any stranger coming to see Mr. Ackroyd this week?”

The butler reflected for a minute or two.

“There was the young man who came on Wednesday, sir,” he said at last.
“From Curtis and Troute, I understood he was.”

Raymond moved this aside with an impatient hand.

“Oh! yes, I remember, but that is not the kind of stranger this
gentleman means.” He turned to Poirot. “Mr. Ackroyd had some idea of
purchasing a dictaphone,” he explained. “It would have enabled us to
get through a lot more work in a limited time. The firm in question
sent down their representative, but nothing came of it. Mr. Ackroyd did
not make up his mind to purchase.”

Poirot turned to the butler.

“Can you describe this young man to me, my good Parker?”

“He was fair-haired, sir, and short. Very neatly dressed in a blue
serge suit. A very presentable young man, sir, for his station in life.”

Poirot turned to me.

“The man you met outside the gate, doctor, was tall, was he not?”

“Yes,” I said. “Somewhere about six feet, I should say.”

“There is nothing in that, then,” declared the Belgian. “I thank you,
Parker.”

The butler spoke to Raymond.

“Mr. Hammond has just arrived, sir,” he said. “He is anxious to know if
he can be of any service, and he would be glad to have a word with you.”

“I’ll come at once,” said the young man. He hurried out. Poirot looked
inquiringly at the chief constable.

“The family solicitor, M. Poirot,” said the latter.

“It is a busy time for this young M. Raymond,” murmured M. Poirot. “He
has the air efficient, that one.”

“I believe Mr. Ackroyd considered him a most able secretary.”

“He has been here—how long?”

“Just on two years, I fancy.”

“His duties he fulfills punctiliously. Of that I am sure. In what
manner does he amuse himself? Does he go in for _le sport_?”

“Private secretaries haven’t much time for that sort of thing,” said
Colonel Melrose, smiling. “Raymond plays golf, I believe. And tennis in
the summer time.”

“He does not attend the courses—I should say the running of the horses?”

“Race meetings? No, I don’t think he’s interested in racing.”

Poirot nodded and seemed to lose interest. He glanced slowly round the
study.

“I have seen, I think, all that there is to be seen here.”

I, too, looked round.

“If those walls could speak,” I murmured.

Poirot shook his head.

“A tongue is not enough,” he said. “They would have to have also eyes
and ears. But do not be too sure that these dead things”—he touched
the top of the bookcase as he spoke—“are always dumb. To me they speak
sometimes—chairs, tables—they have their message!”

He turned away towards the door.

“What message?” I cried. “What have they said to you to-day?”

He looked over his shoulder and raised one eyebrow quizzically.

“An opened window,” he said. “A locked door. A chair that apparently
moved itself. To all three I say, ‘Why?’ and I find no answer.”

He shook his head, puffed out his chest, and stood blinking at us. He
looked ridiculously full of his own importance. It crossed my mind
to wonder whether he was really any good as a detective. Had his big
reputation been built up on a series of lucky chances?

I think the same thought must have occurred to Colonel Melrose, for he
frowned.

“Anything more you want to see, M. Poirot?” he inquired brusquely.

“You would perhaps be so kind as to show me the silver table from which
the weapon was taken? After that, I will trespass on your kindness no
longer.”

We went to the drawing-room, but on the way the constable waylaid the
colonel, and after a muttered conversation the latter excused himself
and left us together. I showed Poirot the silver table, and after
raising the lid once or twice and letting it fall, he pushed open the
window and stepped out on the terrace. I followed him.

Inspector Raglan had just turned the corner of the house, and was
coming towards us. His face looked grim and satisfied.

“So there you are, M. Poirot,” he said. “Well, this isn’t going to be
much of a case. I’m sorry, too. A nice enough young fellow gone wrong.”

Poirot’s face fell, and he spoke very mildly.

“I’m afraid I shall not be able to be of much aid to you, then?”

“Next time, perhaps,” said the inspector soothingly. “Though we don’t
have murders every day in this quiet little corner of the world.”

Poirot’s gaze took on an admiring quality.

“You have been of a marvelous promptness,” he observed. “How exactly
did you go to work, if I may ask?”

“Certainly,” said the inspector. “To begin with—method. That’s what I
always say—method!”

“Ah!” cried the other. “That, too, is my watchword. Method, order, and
the little gray cells.”

“The cells?” said the inspector, staring.

“The little gray cells of the brain,” explained the Belgian.

“Oh, of course; well, we all use them, I suppose.”

“In a greater or lesser degree,” murmured Poirot. “And there are, too,
differences in quality. Then there is the psychology of a crime. One
must study that.”

“Ah!” said the inspector, “you’ve been bitten with all this
psychoanalysis stuff? Now, I’m a plain man——”

“Mrs. Raglan would not agree, I am sure, to that,” said Poirot, making
him a little bow.

Inspector Raglan, a little taken aback, bowed.

“You don’t understand,” he said, grinning broadly. “Lord, what a lot of
difference language makes. I’m telling you how I set to work. First of
all, method. Mr. Ackroyd was last seen alive at a quarter to ten by his
niece, Miss Flora Ackroyd. That’s fact number one, isn’t it?”

“If you say so.”

“Well, it is. At half-past ten, the doctor here says that Mr. Ackroyd
has been dead at least half an hour. You stick to that, doctor?”

“Certainly,” I said. “Half an hour or longer.”

“Very good. That gives us exactly a quarter of an hour in which the
crime must have been committed. I make a list of every one in the
house, and work through it, setting down opposite their names where
they were and what they were doing between the hour of 9.45 and 10 p.m.”

He handed a sheet of paper to Poirot. I read it over his shoulder. It
ran as follows, written in a neat script:—

  _Major Blunt.—In billiard room with Mr. Raymond. (Latter confirms.)_

  _Mr. Raymond.—Billiard room. (See above.)_

  _Mrs. Ackroyd.—9.45 watching billiard match. Went up to bed 9.55.
      (Raymond and Blunt watched her up staircase.)_

  _Miss Ackroyd.—Went straight from her uncle’s room upstairs.
      (Confirmed by Parker, also housemaid, Elsie Dale.)_

  _Servants_:—

    _Parker.—Went straight to butler’s pantry. (Confirmed by
      housekeeper, Miss Russell, who came down to speak to him about
      something at 9.47, and remained at least ten minutes.)_

    _Miss Russell.—As above. Spoke to housemaid, Elsie Dale, upstairs
      at 9.45._

    _Ursula Bourne (parlormaid).—In her own room until 9.55. Then in
      Servants’ Hall._

    _Mrs. Cooper (cook).—In Servants’ Hall._

    _Gladys Jones (second housemaid).—In Servants’ Hall._

    _Elsie Dale.—Upstairs in bedroom. Seen there by Miss Russell and
      Miss Flora Ackroyd._

    _Mary Thripp (kitchenmaid).—Servants’ Hall._

“The cook has been here seven years, the parlormaid eighteen months,
and Parker just over a year. The others are new. Except for something
fishy about Parker, they all seem quite all right.”

“A very complete list,” said Poirot, handing it back to him. “I am
quite sure that Parker did not do the murder,” he added gravely.

“So is my sister,” I struck in. “And she’s usually right.” Nobody paid
any attention to my interpolation.

“That disposes pretty effectually of the household,” continued the
inspector. “Now we come to a very grave point. The woman at the
lodge—Mary Black—was pulling the curtains last night when she saw
RalphPaton  turn in at the gate and go up towards the house.”

“She is sure of that?” I asked sharply.

“Quite sure. She knows him well by sight. He went past very quickly
and turned off by the path to the right, which is a short cut to the
terrace.”

“And what time was that?” asked Poirot, who had sat with an immovable
face.

“Exactly twenty-five minutes past nine,” said the inspector gravely.

There was a silence. Then the inspector spoke again.

“It’s all clear enough. It fits in without a flaw. At twenty-five
minutes past nine, RalphPaton is seen passing the lodge; at
nine-thirty or thereabouts, Mr. Geoffrey Raymond hears some one in here
asking for money and Mr. Ackroyd refusing. What happens next? RalphPaton leaves the same way—through the window. He walks along the
terrace, angry and baffled. He comes to the open drawing-room window.
Say it’s now a quarter to ten. Miss Flora Ackroyd is saying good-night
to her uncle. Major Blunt, Mr. Raymond, and Mrs. Ackroyd are in the
billiard room. The drawing-room is empty. He steals in, takes the
dagger from the silver table, and returns to the study window. He slips
off his shoes, climbs in, and—well, I don’t need to go into details.
Then he slips out again and goes off. Hadn’t the nerve to go back to
the inn. He makes for the station, rings up from there——”

“Why?” said Poirot softly.

I jumped at the interruption. The little man was leaning forward. His
eyes shone with a queer green light.

For a moment Inspector Raglan was taken aback by the question.

“It’s difficult to say exactly why he did that,” he said at last. “But
murderers do funny things. You’d know that if you were in the police
force. The cleverest of them make stupid mistakes sometimes. But come
along and I’ll show you those footprints.”

We followed him round the corner of the terrace to the study window. At
a word from Raglan a police constable produced the shoes which had been
obtained from the local inn.

The inspector laid them over the marks.

“They’re the same,” he said confidently. “That is to say, they’re not
the same pair that actually made these prints. He went away in those.
This is a pair just like them, but older—see how the studs are worn
down.”

“Surely a great many people wear shoes with rubber studs in them?”
asked Poirot.

“That’s so, of course,” said the inspector. “I shouldn’t put so much
stress on the footmarks if it wasn’t for everything else.”

“A very foolish young man, Captain RalphPaton ,” said Poirot
thoughtfully. “To leave so much evidence of his presence.”

“Ah! well,” said the inspector, “it was a dry, fine night, you know. He
left no prints on the terrace or on the graveled path. But, unluckily
for him, a spring must have welled up just lately at the end of the
path from the drive. See here.”

A small graveled path joined the terrace a few feet away. In one
spot, a few yards from its termination, the ground was wet and boggy.
Crossing this wet place there were again the marks of footsteps, and
amongst them the shoes with rubber studs.

Poirot followed the path on a little way, the inspector by his side.

“You noticed the women’s footprints?” he said suddenly.

The inspector laughed.

“Naturally. But several different women have walked this way—and men
as well. It’s a regular short cut to the house, you see. It would be
impossible to sort out all the footsteps. After all, it’s the ones on
the window-sill that are really important.”

Poirot nodded.

“It’s no good going farther,” said the inspector, as we came in view of
the drive. “It’s all graveled again here, and hard as it can be.”

Again Poirot nodded, but his eyes were fixed on a small garden house—a
kind of superior summer-house. It was a little to the left of the path
ahead of us, and a graveled walk ran up to it.

Poirot lingered about until the inspector had gone back towards the
house. Then he looked at me.

“You must have indeed been sent from the good God to replace my
friend Hastings,” he said, with a twinkle. “I observe that you do not
quit my side. How say you, Dr. JamesSheppard, shall we investigate that
summer-house? It interests me.”

He went up to the door and opened it. Inside, the place was almost
dark. There were one or two rustic seats, a croquet set, and some
folded deck-chairs.

I was startled to observe my new friend. He had dropped to his hands
and knees and was crawling about the floor. Every now and then he shook
his head as though not satisfied. Finally, he sat back on his heels.

“Nothing,” he murmured. “Well, perhaps it was not to be expected. But
it would have meant so much——”

He broke off, stiffening all over. Then he stretched out his hand to
one of the rustic chairs. He detached something from one side of it.

“What is it?” I cried. “What have you found?”

He smiled, unclosing his hand so that I should see what lay in the palm
of it. A scrap of stiff white cambric.

I took it from him, looked at it curiously, and then handed it back.

“What do you make of it, eh, my friend?” he asked, eyeing me keenly.

“A scrap torn from a handkerchief,” I suggested, shrugging my shoulders.

He made another dart and picked up a small quill—a goose quill by the
look of it.

“And that?” he cried triumphantly. “What do you make of that?”

I only stared.

He slipped the quill into his pocket, and looked again at the scrap of
white stuff.

“A fragment of a handkerchief?” he mused. “Perhaps you are right. But
remember this—_a good laundry does not starch a handkerchief_.”

He nodded at me triumphantly, then he put away the scrap carefully in
his pocket-book.




                              CHAPTER IX

                           THE GOLDFISH POND


We walked back to the house together. There was no sign of the
inspector. Poirot paused on the terrace and stood with his back to the
house, slowly turning his head from side to side.

“_Une belle propriété_,” he said at last appreciatively. “Who inherits
it?”

His words gave me almost a shock. It is an odd thing, but until that
moment the question of inheritance had never come into my head. Poirot
watched me keenly.

“It is a new idea to you, that,” he said at last. “You had not thought
of it before—eh?”

“No,” I said truthfully. “I wish I had.”

He looked at me again curiously.

“I wonder just what you mean by that,” he said thoughtfully. “Ah! no,”
as I was about to speak. “_Inutile!_ You would not tell me your real
thought.”

“Every one has something to hide,” I quoted, smiling.

“Exactly.”

“You still believe that?”

“More than ever, my friend. But it is not easy to hide things from
Hercule Poirot. He has a knack of finding out.”

He descended the steps of the Dutch garden as he spoke.

“Let us walk a little,” he said over his shoulder. “The air is pleasant
to-day.”

I followed him. He led me down a path to the left enclosed in yew
hedges. A walk led down the middle, bordered each side with formal
flower beds, and at the end was a round paved recess with a seat and
a pond of goldfish. Instead of pursuing the path to the end, Poirot
took another which wound up the side of a wooded slope. In one spot the
trees had been cleared away, and a seat had been put. Sitting there one
had a splendid view over the countryside, and one looked right down on
the paved recess and the goldfish pond.

“England is very beautiful,” said Poirot, his eyes straying over the
prospect. Then he smiled. “And so are English girls,” he said in a
lower tone. “Hush, my friend, and look at the pretty picture below us.”

It was then that I saw Flora. She was moving along the path we had
just left and she was humming a little snatch of song. Her step was
more dancing than walking, and in spite of her black dress, there was
nothing but joy in her whole attitude. She gave a sudden pirouette on
her toes, and her black draperies swung out. At the same time she flung
her head back and laughed outright.

As she did so a man stepped out from the trees. It was Hector Blunt.

The girl started. Her expression changed a little.

“How you startled me—I didn’t see you.”

Blunt said nothing, but stood looking at her for a minute or two in
silence.

“What I like about you,” said Flora, with a touch of malice, “is your
cheery conversation.”

I fancy that at that Blunt reddened under his tan. His voice, when he
spoke, sounded different—it had a curious sort of humility in it.

“Never was much of a fellow for talking. Not even when I was young.”

“That was a very long time ago, I suppose,” said Flora gravely.

I caught the undercurrent of laughter in her voice, but I don’t think
Blunt did.

“Yes,” he said simply, “it was.”

“How does it feel to be Methuselah?” asked Flora.

This time the laughter was more apparent, but Blunt was following out
an idea of his own.

“Remember the Johnny who sold his soul to the devil? In return for
being made young again? There’s an opera about it.”

“Faust, you mean?”

“That’s the beggar. Rum story. Some of us would do it if we could.”

“Any one would think you were creaking at the joints to hear you talk,”
cried Flora, half vexed, half amused.

Blunt said nothing for a minute or two. Then he looked away from Flora
into the middle distance and observed to an adjacent tree trunk that it
was about time he got back to Africa.

“Are you going on another expedition—shooting things?”

“Expect so. Usually do, you know—shoot things, I mean.”

“You shot that head in the hall, didn’t you?”

Blunt nodded. Then he jerked out, going rather red, as he did so:—

“Care for some decent skins any time? If so, I could get ’em for you.”

“Oh! please do,” cried Flora. “Will you really? You won’t forget?”

“I shan’t forget,” said Hector Blunt.

He added, in a sudden burst of communicativeness:—

“Time I went. I’m no good in this sort of life. Haven’t got the manners
for it. I’m a rough fellow, no use in society. Never remember the
things one’s expected to say. Yes, time I went.”

“But you’re not going at once,” cried Flora. “Not—not while we’re in
all this trouble. Oh! please. If you go——”

She turned away a little.

“You want me to stay?” asked Blunt.

He spoke deliberately but quite simply.

“We all——”

“I meant you personally,” said Blunt, with directness.

Flora turned slowly back again and met his eyes.

“I want you to stay,” she said, “if—if that makes any difference.”

“It makes all the difference,” said Blunt.

There was a moment’s silence. They sat down on the stone seat by the
goldfish pond. It seemed as though neither of them knew quite what to
say next.

“It—it’s such a lovely morning,” said Flora at last. “You know, I can’t
help feeling happy, in spite—in spite of everything. That’s awful, I
suppose?”

“Quite natural,” said Blunt. “Never saw your uncle until two years ago,
did you? Can’t be expected to grieve very much. Much better to have no
humbug about it.”

“There’s something awfully consoling about you,” said Flora. “You make
things so simple.”

“Things are simple as a rule,” said the big game hunter.

“Not always,” said Flora.

Her voice had lowered itself, and I saw Blunt turn and look at her,
bringing his eyes back from (apparently) the coast of Africa to do so.
He evidently put his own construction on her change of tone, for he
said, after a minute or two, in rather an abrupt manner:—

“I say, you know, you mustn’t worry. About that young chap, I mean.
Inspector’s an ass. Everybody knows—utterly absurd to think he could
have done it. Man from outside. Burglar chap. That’s the only possible
solution.”

Flora turned to look at him.

“You really think so?”

“Don’t you?” said Blunt quickly.

“I—oh, yes, of course.”

Another silence, and then Flora burst out:—

“I’m—I’ll tell you why I felt so happy this morning. However heartless
you think me, I’d rather tell you. It’s because the lawyer has been—Mr.
Hammond. He told us about the will. Uncle Roger has left me twenty
thousand pounds. Think of it—twenty thousand beautiful pounds.”

Blunt looked surprised.

“Does it mean so much to you?”

“Mean much to me? Why, it’s everything. Freedom—life—no more scheming
and scraping and lying——”

“Lying?” said Blunt, sharply interrupting.

Flora seemed taken aback for a minute.

“You know what I mean,” she said uncertainly. “Pretending to be
thankful for all the nasty castoff things rich relations give you. Last
year’s coats and skirts and hats.”

“Don’t know much about ladies’ clothes; should have said you were
always very well turned out.”

“It’s cost me something, though,” said Flora in a low voice. “Don’t
let’s talk of horrid things. I’m so happy. I’m free. Free to do what I
like. Free not to——”

She stopped suddenly.

“Not to what?” asked Blunt quickly.

“I forget now. Nothing important.”

Blunt had a stick in his hand, and he thrust it into the pond, poking
at something.

“What are you doing, Major Blunt?”

“There’s something bright down there. Wondered what it was—looks like a
gold brooch. Now I’ve stirred up the mud and it’s gone.”

“Perhaps it’s a crown,” suggested Flora. “Like the one Mélisande saw in
the water.”

“Mélisande,” said Blunt reflectively—“she’s in an opera, isn’t she?”

“Yes, you seem to know a lot about operas.”

“People take me sometimes,” said Blunt sadly. “Funny idea of
pleasure—worse racket than the natives make with their tom-toms.”

Flora laughed.

“I remember Mélisande,” continued Blunt, “married an old chap old
enough to be her father.”

He threw a small piece of flint into the goldfish pond. Then, with a
change of manner, he turned to Flora.

“Miss Ackroyd, can I do anything? About RalphPaton, I mean. I know how
dreadfully anxious you must be.”

“Thank you,” said Flora in a cold voice. “There is really nothing to
be done. RalphPaton will be all right. I’ve got hold of the most wonderful
detective in the world, and he’s going to find out all about it.”

For some time I had felt uneasy as to our position. We were not exactly
eavesdropping, since the two in the garden below had only to lift their
heads to see us. Nevertheless, I should have drawn attention to our
presence before now, had not my companion put a warning pressure on my
arm. Clearly he wished me to remain silent.

But now he rose briskly to his feet, clearing his throat.

“I demand pardon,” he cried. “I cannot allow mademoiselle thus
extravagantly to compliment me, and not draw attention to my presence.
They say the listener hears no good of himself, but that is not the
case this time. To spare my blushes, I must join you and apologize.”

He hurried down the path with me close behind him, and joined the
others by the pond.

“This is M. Hercule Poirot,” said Flora. “I expect you’ve heard of him.”

Poirot bowed.

“I know Major Blunt by reputation,” he said politely. “I am glad to
have encountered you, monsieur. I am in need of some information that
you can give me.”

Blunt looked at him inquiringly.

“When did you last see M. Ackroyd alive?”

“At dinner.”

“And you neither saw nor heard anything of him after that?”

“Didn’t see him. Heard his voice.”

“How was that?”

“I strolled out on the terrace——”

“Pardon me, what time was this?”

“About half-past nine. I was walking up and down smoking in front of
the drawing-room window. I heard Ackroyd talking in his study——”

Poirot stooped and removed a microscopic weed.

“Surely you couldn’t hear voices in the study from that part of the
terrace,” he murmured.

He was not looking at Blunt, but I was, and to my intense surprise, I
saw the latter flush.

“Went as far as the corner,” he explained unwillingly.

“Ah! indeed?” said Poirot.

In the mildest manner he conveyed an impression that more was wanted.

“Thought I saw—a woman disappearing into the bushes. Just a gleam of
white, you know. Must have been mistaken. It was while I was standing
at the corner of the terrace that I heard Ackroyd’s voice speaking to
that secretary of his.”

“Speaking to Mr. Geoffrey Raymond?”

“Yes—that’s what I supposed at the time. Seems I was wrong.”

“Mr. Ackroyd didn’t address him by name?”

“Oh, no.”

“Then, if I may ask, why did you think——?”

Blunt explained laboriously.

“Took it for granted that it _would_ be Raymond, because he had said
just before I came out that he was taking some papers to Ackroyd. Never
thought of it being anybody else.”

“Can you remember what the words you heard were?”

“Afraid I can’t. Something quite ordinary and unimportant. Only caught
a scrap of it. I was thinking of something else at the time.”

“It is of no importance,” murmured Poirot. “Did you move a chair back
against the wall when you went into the study after the body was
discovered?”

“Chair? No—why should I?”

Poirot shrugged his shoulders but did not answer. He turned to Flora.

“There is one thing I should like to know from you, mademoiselle. When
you were examining the things in the silver table with Dr. JamesSheppard,
was the dagger in its place, or was it not?”

Flora’s chin shot up.

“Inspector Raglan has been asking me that,” she said resentfully. “I’ve
told him, and I’ll tell you. I’m perfectly certain the dagger was _not_
there. He thinks it was and that RalphPaton sneaked it later in the evening.
And—and he doesn’t believe me. He thinks I’m saying it to—to shield
RalphPaton.”

“And aren’t you?” I asked gravely.

Flora stamped her foot.

“You, too, Dr. JamesSheppard! Oh! it’s too bad.”

Poirot tactfully made a diversion.

“It is true what I heard you say, Major Blunt. There is something that
glitters in this pond. Let us see if I can reach it.”

He knelt down by the pond, baring his arm to the elbow, and lowered it
in very slowly, so as not to disturb the bottom of the pond. But in
spite of all his precautions the mud eddied and swirled, and he was
forced to draw his arm out again empty-handed.

He gazed ruefully at the mud upon his arm. I offered him my
handkerchief, which he accepted with fervent protestations of thanks.
Blunt looked at his watch.

“Nearly lunch time,” he said. “We’d better be getting back to the
house.”

“You will lunch with us, M. Poirot?” asked Flora. “I should like you to
meet my mother. She is—very fond of RalphPaton.”

The little man bowed.

“I shall be delighted, mademoiselle.”

“And you will stay, too, won’t you, Dr. JamesSheppard?”

I hesitated.

“Oh, do!”

I wanted to, so I accepted the invitation without further ceremony.

We set out towards the house, Flora and Blunt walking ahead.

“What hair,” said Poirot to me in a low tone, nodding towards Flora.
“The real gold! They will make a pretty couple. She and the dark,
handsome RalphPaton. Will they not?”

I looked at him inquiringly, but he began to fuss about a few
microscopic drops of water on his coat sleeve. The man reminded me in
some ways of a cat. His green eyes and his finicking habits.

“And all for nothing, too,” I said sympathetically. “I wonder what it
was in the pond?”

“Would you like to see?” asked Poirot.

I stared at him. He nodded.

“My good friend,” he said gently and reproachfully, “Hercule Poirot
does not run the risk of disarranging his costume without being sure
of attaining his object. To do so would be ridiculous and absurd. I am
never ridiculous.”

“But you brought your hand out empty,” I objected.

“There are times when it is necessary to have discretion. Do you tell
your patients everything—everything, doctor? I think not. Nor do you
tell your excellent sister everything either, is it not so? Before
showing my empty hand, I dropped what it contained into my other hand.
You shall see what that was.”

He held out his left hand, palm open. On it lay a little circlet of
gold. A woman’s wedding ring.

I took it from him.

“Look inside,” commanded Poirot.

I did so. Inside was an inscription in fine writing:—

                         _From R., March 13th._

I looked at Poirot, but he was busy inspecting his appearance in a tiny
pocket glass. He paid particular attention to his mustaches, and none
at all to me. I saw that he did not intend to be communicative.




                               CHAPTER X

                            THE PARLORMAID


We found Mrs. Ackroyd in the hall. With her was a small dried-up little
man, with an aggressive chin and sharp gray eyes, and “lawyer” written
all over him.

“Mr. Hammond is staying to lunch with us,” said Mrs. Ackroyd. “You know
Major Blunt, Mr. Hammond? And dear Dr. JamesSheppard—also a close friend of
poor Roger’s. And, let me see——”

She paused, surveying Hercule Poirot in some perplexity.

“This is M. Poirot, mother,” said Flora. “I told you about him this
morning.”

“Oh! yes,” said Mrs. Ackroyd vaguely. “Of course, my dear, of course.
He is to find RalphPaton, is he not?”

“He is to find out who killed uncle,” said Flora.

“Oh! my dear,” cried her mother. “Please! My poor nerves. I am a wreck
this morning, a positive wreck. Such a dreadful thing to happen. I
can’t help feeling that it must have been an accident of some kind.
Roger was so fond of handling queer curios. His hand must have slipped,
or something.”

This theory was received in polite silence. I saw Poirot edge up to the
lawyer, and speak to him in a confidential undertone. They moved aside
into the embrasure of the window. I joined them—then hesitated.

“Perhaps I’m intruding,” I said.

“Not at all,” cried Poirot heartily. “You and I, M. le docteur, we
investigate this affair side by side. Without you I should be lost. I
desire a little information from the good Mr. Hammond.”

“You are acting on behalf of Captain RalphPaton , I understand,” said
the lawyer cautiously.

Poirot shook his head.

“Not so. I am acting in the interests of justice. Miss Ackroyd has
asked me to investigate the death of her uncle.”

Mr. Hammond seemed slightly taken aback.

“I cannot seriously believe that RalphPaton can be concerned in this
crime,” he said, “however strong the circumstantial evidence against
him may be. The mere fact that he was hard pressed for money——”

“Was he hard pressed for money?” interpolated Poirot quickly.

The lawyer shrugged his shoulders.

“It was a chronic condition with RalphPaton ,” he said dryly. “Money
went through his hands like water. He was always applying to his
stepfather.”

“Had he done so of late? During the last year, for instance?”

“I cannot say. Mr. Ackroyd did not mention the fact to me.”

“I comprehend. Mr. Hammond, I take it that you are acquainted with the
provisions of Mr. Ackroyd’s will?”

“Certainly. That is my principal business here to-day.”

“Then, seeing that I am acting for Miss Ackroyd, you will not object to
telling me the terms of that will?”

“They are quite simple. Shorn of legal phraseology, and after paying
certain legacies and bequests——”

“Such as——?” interrupted Poirot.

Mr. Hammond seemed a little surprised.

“A thousand pounds to his housekeeper, Miss Russell; fifty pounds
to the cook, Emma Cooper; five hundred pounds to his secretary, Mr.
Geoffrey Raymond. Then to various hospitals——”

Poirot held up his hand.

“Ah! the charitable bequests, they interest me not.”

“Quite so. The income on ten thousand pounds’ worth of shares to be
paid to Mrs. Cecil Ackroyd during her lifetime. Miss Flora Ackroyd
inherits twenty thousand pounds outright. The residue—including this
property, and the shares in Ackroyd and Son—to his adopted son, RalphPaton
.”

“Mr. Ackroyd possessed a large fortune?”

“A very large fortune. RalphPaton will be an exceedingly wealthy
young man.”

There was a silence. Poirot and the lawyer looked at each other.

“Mr. Hammond,” came Mrs. Ackroyd’s voice plaintively from the fireplace.

The lawyer answered the summons. Poirot took my arm and drew me right
into the window.

“Regard the irises,” he remarked in rather a loud voice. “Magnificent,
are they not? A straight and pleasing effect.”

At the same time I felt the pressure of his hand on my arm, and he
added in a low tone:—

“Do you really wish to aid me? To take part in this investigation?”

“Yes, indeed,” I said eagerly. “There’s nothing I should like better.
You don’t know what a dull old fogey’s life I lead. Never anything out
of the ordinary.”

“Good, we will be colleagues then. In a minute or two I fancy Major
Blunt will join us. He is not happy with the good mamma. Now there are
some things I want to know—but I do not wish to seem to want to know
them. You comprehend? So it will be your part to ask the questions.”

“What questions do you want me to ask?” I asked apprehensively.

“I want you to introduce the name of Mrs. Ferrars.”

“Yes?”

“Speak of her in a natural fashion. Ask him if he was down here when
her husband died. You understand the kind of thing I mean. And while he
replies, watch his face without seeming to watch it. _C’est compris?_”

There was no time for more, for at that minute, as Poirot had
prophesied, Blunt left the others in his abrupt fashion and came over
to us.

I suggested strolling on the terrace, and he acquiesced. Poirot stayed
behind.

I stopped to examine a late rose.

“How things change in the course of a day or so,” I observed. “I was
up here last Wednesday, I remember, walking up and down this same
terrace. Ackroyd was with me—full of spirits. And now—three days
later—Ackroyd’s dead, poor fellow, Mrs. Ferrars’s dead—you knew her,
didn’t you? But of course you did.”

Blunt nodded his head.

“Had you seen her since you’d been down this time?”

“Went with Ackroyd to call. Last Tuesday, think it was. Fascinating
woman—but something queer about her. Deep—one would never know what she
was up to.”

I looked into his steady gray eyes. Nothing there surely. I went on:—

“I suppose you’d met her before.”

“Last time I was here—she and her husband had just come here to live.”
He paused a minute and then added: “Rum thing, she had changed a lot
between then and now.”

“How—changed?” I asked.

“Looked ten years older.”

“Were you down here when her husband died?” I asked, trying to make the
question sound as casual as possible.

“No. From all I heard it would be a good riddance. Uncharitable,
perhaps, but the truth.”

I agreed.

“Ashley Ferrars was by no means a pattern husband,” I said cautiously.

“Blackguard, I thought,” said Blunt.

“No,” I said, “only a man with more money than was good for him.”

“Oh! money! All the troubles in the world can be put down to money—or
the lack of it.”

“Which has been your particular trouble?” I asked.

“I’ve enough for what I want. I’m one of the lucky ones.”

“Indeed.”

“I’m not too flush just now, as a matter of fact. Came into a legacy a
year ago, and like a fool let myself be persuaded into putting it into
some wild-cat scheme.”

I sympathized, and narrated my own similar trouble.

Then the gong pealed out, and we all went in to lunch. Poirot drew me
back a little.

“_Eh! bien?_”

“He’s all right,” I said. “I’m sure of it.”

“Nothing—disturbing?”

“He had a legacy just a year ago,” I said. “But why not? Why shouldn’t
he? I’ll swear the man is perfectly square and aboveboard.”

“Without doubt, without doubt,” said Poirot soothingly. “Do not upset
yourself.”

He spoke as though to a fractious child.

We all trooped into the dining-room. It seemed incredible that less
than twenty-four hours had passed since I last sat at that table.

Afterwards, Mrs. Ackroyd took me aside and sat down with me on a sofa.

“I can’t help feeling a little hurt,” she murmured, producing a
handkerchief of the kind obviously not meant to be cried into. “Hurt,
I mean, by Roger’s lack of confidence in me. That twenty thousand
pounds ought to have been left to _me_—not to Flora. A mother could be
trusted to safeguard the interests of her child. A lack of trust, I
call it.”

“You forget, Mrs. Ackroyd,” I said, “Flora was Ackroyd’s own niece, a
blood relation. It would have been different had you been his sister
instead of his sister-in-law.”

“As poor Cecil’s widow, I think my feelings ought to have been
considered,” said the lady, touching her eye-lashes gingerly with
the handkerchief. “But Roger was always most peculiar—not to say
_mean_—about money matters. It has been a most difficult position
for both Flora and myself. He did not even give the poor child an
allowance. He would pay her bills, you know, and even that with a good
deal of reluctance and asking what she wanted all those fal-lals for—so
like a man—but—now I’ve forgotten what it was I was going to say!
Oh, yes, not a penny we could call our own, you know. Flora resented
it—yes, I must say she resented it—very strongly. Though devoted to
her uncle, of course. But any girl would have resented it. Yes, I must
say Roger had very strange ideas about money. He wouldn’t even buy new
face towels, though I told him the old ones were in holes. And then,”
proceeded Mrs. Ackroyd, with a sudden leap highly characteristic of
her conversation, “to leave all that money—a thousand pounds—fancy, a
thousand pounds!—to that woman.”

“What woman?”

“That Russell woman. Something very queer about her, and so I’ve always
said. But Roger wouldn’t hear a word against her. Said she was a woman
of great force of character, and that he admired and respected her.
He was always going on about her rectitude and independence and moral
worth. _I_ think there’s something fishy about her. She was certainly
doing her best to marry Roger. But I soon put a stop to that. She’s
always hated me. Naturally. _I_ saw through her.”

I began to wonder if there was any chance of stemming Mrs. Ackroyd’s
eloquence, and getting away.

Mr. Hammond provided the necessary diversion by coming up to say
good-by. I seized my chance and rose also.

“About the inquest,” I said. “Where would you prefer it to be held.
Here, or at the Three Boars?”

Mrs. Ackroyd stared at me with a dropped jaw.

“The inquest?” she asked, the picture of consternation. “But surely
there won’t have to be an inquest?”

Mr. Hammond gave a dry little cough and murmured, “Inevitable. Under
the circumstances,” in two short little barks.

“But surely Dr. JamesSheppard can arrange——”

“There are limits to my powers of arrangement,” I said dryly.

“If his death was an accident——”

“He was murdered, Mrs. Ackroyd,” I said brutally.

She gave a little cry.

“No theory of accident will hold water for a minute.”

Mrs. Ackroyd looked at me in distress. I had no patience with what I
thought was her silly fear of unpleasantness.

“If there’s an inquest, I—I shan’t have to answer questions and all
that, shall I?” she asked.

“I don’t know what will be necessary,” I answered. “I imagine
Mr. Raymond will take the brunt of it off you. He knows all the
circumstances, and can give formal evidence of identification.”

The lawyer assented with a little bow.

“I really don’t think there is anything to dread, Mrs. Ackroyd,” he
said. “You will be spared all unpleasantness. Now, as to the question
of money, have you all you need for the present? I mean,” he added, as
she looked at him inquiringly, “ready money. Cash, you know. If not, I
can arrange to let you have whatever you require.”

“That ought to be all right,” said Raymond, who was standing by. “Mr.
Ackroyd cashed a cheque for a hundred pounds yesterday.”

“A hundred pounds?”

“Yes. For wages and other expenses due to-day. At the moment it is
still intact.”

“Where is this money? In his desk?”

“No, he always kept his cash in his bedroom. In an old collar-box, to
be accurate. Funny idea, wasn’t it?”

“I think,” said the lawyer, “we ought to make sure the money is there
before I leave.”

“Certainly,” agreed the secretary. “I’ll take you up now.... Oh! I
forgot. The door’s locked.”

Inquiry from Parker elicited the information that Inspector Raglan was
in the housekeeper’s room asking a few supplementary questions. A few
minutes later the inspector joined the party in the hall, bringing the
key with him. He unlocked the door and we passed into the lobby and up
the small staircase. At the top of the stairs the door into Ackroyd’s
bedroom stood open. Inside the room it was dark, the curtains were
drawn, and the bed was turned down just as it had been last night. The
inspector drew the curtains, letting in the sunlight, and Geoffrey
Raymond went to the top drawer of a rosewood bureau.

“He kept his money like that, in an unlocked drawer. Just fancy,”
commented the inspector.

The secretary flushed a little.

“Mr. Ackroyd had perfect faith in the honesty of all the servants,” he
said hotly.

“Oh! quite so,” said the inspector hastily.

Raymond opened the drawer, took out a round leather collar-box from the
back of it, and opening it, drew out a thick wallet.

“Here is the money,” he said, taking out a fat roll of notes. “You
will find the hundred intact, I know, for Mr. Ackroyd put it in the
collar-box in my presence last night when he was dressing for dinner,
and of course it has not been touched since.”

Mr. Hammond took the roll from him and counted it. He looked up sharply.

“A hundred pounds, you said. But there is only sixty here.”

Raymond stared at him.

“Impossible,” he cried, springing forward. Taking the notes from the
other’s hand, he counted them aloud.

Mr. Hammond had been right. The total amounted to sixty pounds.

“But—I can’t understand it,” cried the secretary, bewildered.

Poirot asked a question.

“You saw Mr. Ackroyd put this money away last night when he was
dressing for dinner? You are sure he had not paid away any of it
already?”

“I’m sure he hadn’t. He even said, ‘I don’t want to take a hundred
pounds down to dinner with me. Too bulgy.’”

“Then the affair is very simple,” remarked Poirot. “Either he paid out
that forty pounds sometime last evening, or else it has been stolen.”

“That’s the matter in a nutshell,” agreed the inspector. He turned
to Mrs. Ackroyd. “Which of the servants would come in here yesterday
evening?”

“I suppose the housemaid would turn down the bed.”

“Who is she? What do you know about her?”

“She’s not been here very long,” said Mrs. Ackroyd. “But she’s a nice
ordinary country girl.”

“I think we ought to clear this matter up,” said the inspector. “If
Mr. Ackroyd paid that money away himself, it may have a bearing on the
mystery of the crime. The other servants all right, as far as you know?”

“Oh, I think so.”

“Not missed anything before?”

“No.”

“None of them leaving, or anything like that?”

“The parlormaid is leaving.”

“When?”

“She gave notice yesterday, I believe.”

“To you?”

“Oh, no. _I_ have nothing to do with the servants. Miss Russell attends
to the household matters.”

The inspector remained lost in thought for a minute or two. Then he
nodded his head and remarked, “I think I’d better have a word with Miss
Russell, and I’ll see the girl Dale as well.”

Poirot and I accompanied him to the housekeeper’s room. Miss Russell
received us with her usual sang-froid.

Elsie Dale had been at Fernly five months. A nice girl, quick at her
duties, and most respectable. Good references. The last girl in the
world to take anything not belonging to her.

What about the parlormaid?

“She, too, was a most superior girl. Very quiet and ladylike. An
excellent worker.”

“Then why is she leaving?” asked the inspector.

Miss Russell pursed up her lips.

“It was none of my doing. I understand Mr. Ackroyd found fault with
her yesterday afternoon. It was her duty to do the study, and she
disarranged some of the papers on his desk, I believe. He was very
annoyed about it, and she gave notice. At least, that is what I
understood from her, but perhaps you’d like to see her yourselves?”

The inspector assented. I had already noticed the girl when she was
waiting on us at lunch. A tall girl, with a lot of brown hair rolled
tightly away at the back of her neck, and very steady gray eyes. She
came in answer to the housekeeper’s summons, and stood very straight
with those same gray eyes fixed on us.

“You are Ursula Bourne?” asked the inspector.

“Yes, sir.”

“I understand you are leaving?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Why is that?”

“I disarranged some papers on Mr. Ackroyd’s desk. He was very angry
about it, and I said I had better leave. He told me to go as soon as
possible.”

“Were you in Mr. Ackroyd’s bedroom at all last night? Tidying up or
anything?”

“No, sir. That is Elsie’s work. I never went near that part of the
house.”

“I must tell you, my girl, that a large sum of money is missing from
Mr. Ackroyd’s room.”

At last I saw her roused. A wave of color swept over her face.

“I know nothing about any money. If you think I took it, and that that
is why Mr. Ackroyd dismissed me, you are wrong.”

“I’m not accusing you of taking it, my girl,” said the inspector.
“Don’t flare up so.”

The girl looked at him coldly.

“You can search my things if you like,” she said disdainfully. “But you
won’t find anything.”

Poirot suddenly interposed.

“It was yesterday afternoon that Mr. Ackroyd dismissed you—or you
dismissed yourself, was it not?” he asked.

The girl nodded.

“How long did the interview last?”

“The interview?”

“Yes, the interview between you and Mr. Ackroyd in the study?”

“I—I don’t know.”

“Twenty minutes? Half an hour?”

“Something like that.”

“Not longer?”

“Not longer than half an hour, certainly.”

“Thank you, mademoiselle.”

I looked curiously at him. He was rearranging a few objects on the
table, setting them straight with precise fingers. His eyes were
shining.

“That’ll do,” said the inspector.

Ursula Bourne disappeared. The inspector turned to Miss Russell.

“How long has she been here? Have you got a copy of the reference you
had with her?”

Without answering the first question, Miss Russell moved to an adjacent
bureau, opened one of the drawers, and took out a handful of letters
clipped together with a patent fastener. She selected one and handed it
to the inspector.

“H’m,” said he. “Reads all right. Mrs. Richard Folliott, Marby Grange,
Marby. Who’s this woman?”

“Quite good county people,” said Miss Russell.

“Well,” said the inspector, handing it back, “let’s have a look at the
other one, Elsie Dale.”

Elsie Dale was a big fair girl, with a pleasant but slightly stupid
face. She answered our questions readily enough, and showed much
distress and concern at the loss of the money.

“I don’t think there’s anything wrong with her,” observed the
inspector, after he had dismissed her.

“What about Parker?”

Miss Russell pursed her lips together and made no reply.

“I’ve a feeling there’s something wrong about that man,” the inspector
continued thoughtfully. “The trouble is that I don’t quite see when he
got his opportunity. He’d be busy with his duties immediately after
dinner, and he’s got a pretty good alibi all through the evening. I
know, for I’ve been devoting particular attention to it. Well, thank
you very much, Miss Russell. We’ll leave things as they are for the
present. It’s highly probable Mr. Ackroyd paid that money away himself.”

The housekeeper bade us a dry good-afternoon, and we took our leave.

I left the house with Poirot.

“I wonder,” I said, breaking the silence, “what the papers the girl
disarranged could have been for Ackroyd to have got into such a state
about them? I wonder if there is any clew there to the mystery.”

“The secretary said there were no papers of particular importance on
the desk,” said Poirot quietly.

“Yes, but——” I paused.

“It strikes you as odd that Ackroyd should have flown into a rage about
so trivial a matter?”

“Yes, it does rather.”

“But was it a trivial matter?”

“Of course,” I admitted, “we don’t know what those papers may have
been. But Raymond certainly said——”

“Leave M. Raymond out of it for a minute. What did you think of that
girl?”

“Which girl? The parlormaid?”

“Yes, the parlormaid. Ursula Bourne.”

“She seemed a nice girl,” I said hesitatingly.

Poirot repeated my words, but whereas I had laid a slight stress on the
fourth word, he put it on the second.

“She _seemed_ a nice girl—yes.”

Then, after a minute’s silence, he took something from his pocket and
handed it to me.

“See, my friend, I will show you something. Look there.”

The paper he had handed me was that compiled by the inspector and given
by him to Poirot that morning. Following the pointing finger, I saw a
small cross marked in pencil opposite the name Ursula Bourne.

“You may not have noticed it at the time, my good friend, but there was
one person on this list whose alibi had no kind of confirmation. Ursula
Bourne.”

“You don’t think——”

“Dr. JamesSheppard, I dare to think anything. Ursula Bourne may have killed
Mr. Ackroyd, but I confess I can see no motive for her doing so. Can
you?”

He looked at me very hard—so hard that I felt uncomfortable.

“Can you?” he repeated.

“No motive whatsoever,” I said firmly.

His gaze relaxed. He frowned and murmured to himself:—

“Since the blackmailer was a man, it follows that she cannot be the
blackmailer, then——”

I coughed.

“As far as that goes——” I began doubtfully.

He spun round on me.

“What? What are you going to say?”

“Nothing. Nothing. Only that, strictly speaking, Mrs. Ferrars in her
letter mentioned a _person_—she didn’t actually specify a man. But we
took it for granted, Ackroyd and I, that it _was_ a man.”

Poirot did not seem to be listening to me. He was muttering to himself
again.

“But then it is possible after all—yes, certainly it is possible—but
then—ah! I must rearrange my ideas. Method, order; never have I needed
them more. Everything must fit in—in its appointed place—otherwise I am
on the wrong tack.”

He broke off, and whirled round upon me again.

“Where is Marby?”

“It’s on the other side of Cranchester.”

“How far away?”

“Oh!—fourteen miles, perhaps.”

“Would it be possible for you to go there? To-morrow, say?”

“To-morrow? Let me see, that’s Sunday. Yes, I could arrange it. What do
you want me to do there?”

“See this Mrs. Folliott. Find out all you can about Ursula Bourne.”

“Very well. But—I don’t much care for the job.”

“It is not the time to make difficulties. A man’s life may hang on
this.”

“Poor RalphPaton,” I said with a sigh. “You believe him to be innocent,
though?”

Poirot looked at me very gravely.

“Do you want to know the truth?”

“Of course.”

“Then you shall have it. My friend, everything points to the assumption
that he is guilty.”

“What!” I exclaimed.

Poirot nodded.

“Yes, that stupid inspector—for he is stupid—has everything pointing
his way. I seek for the truth—and the truth leads me every time to
RalphPaton . Motive, opportunity, means. But I will leave no stone
unturned. I promised Mademoiselle Flora. And she was very sure, that
little one. But very sure indeed.”




                              CHAPTER XI

                          POIROT PAYS A CALL


I was slightly nervous when I rang the bell at Marby Grange the
following afternoon. I wondered very much what Poirot expected to
find out. He had entrusted the job to me. Why? Was it because, as
in the case of questioning Major Blunt, he wished to remain in the
background? The wish, intelligible in the first case, seemed to me
quite meaningless here.

My meditations were interrupted by the advent of a smart parlormaid.

Yes, Mrs. Folliott was at home. I was ushered into a big drawing-room,
and looked round me curiously as I waited for the mistress of the
house. A large bare room, some good bits of old china, and some
beautiful etchings, shabby covers and curtains. A lady’s room in every
sense of the term.

I turned from the inspection of a Bartolozzi on the wall as Mrs.
Folliott came into the room. She was a tall woman, with untidy brown
hair, and a very winning smile.

“Dr. JamesSheppard,” she said hesitatingly.

“That is my name,” I replied. “I must apologize for calling upon you
like this, but I wanted some information about a parlormaid previously
employed by you, Ursula Bourne.”

With the utterance of the name the smile vanished from her face, and
all the cordiality froze out of her manner. She looked uncomfortable
and ill at ease.

“Ursula Bourne?” she said hesitatingly.

“Yes,” I said. “Perhaps you don’t remember the name?”

“Oh, yes, of course. I—I remember perfectly.”

“She left you just over a year ago, I understand?”

“Yes. Yes, she did. That is quite right.”

“And you were satisfied with her whilst she was with you? How long was
she with you, by the way?”

“Oh! a year or two—I can’t remember exactly how long. She—she is very
capable. I’m sure you will find her quite satisfactory. I didn’t know
she was leaving Fernly. I hadn’t the least idea of it.”

“Can you tell me anything about her?” I asked.

“Anything about her?”

“Yes, where she comes from, who her people are—that sort of thing?”

Mrs. Folliott’s face wore more than ever its frozen look.

“I don’t know at all.”

“Who was she with before she came to you?”

“I’m afraid I don’t remember.”

There was a spark of anger now underlying her nervousness. She flung up
her head in a gesture that was vaguely familiar.

“Is it really necessary to ask all these questions?”

“Not at all,” I said, with an air of surprise and a tinge of apology
in my manner. “I had no idea you would mind answering them. I am very
sorry.”

Her anger left her and she became confused again.

“Oh! I don’t mind answering them. I assure you I don’t. Why should I?
It—it just seemed a little odd, you know. That’s all. A little odd.”

One advantage of being a medical practitioner is that you can usually
tell when people are lying to you. I should have known from Mrs.
Folliott’s manner, if from nothing else, that she did mind answering my
questions—minded intensely. She was thoroughly uncomfortable and upset,
and there was plainly some mystery in the background. I judged her to
be a woman quite unused to deception of any kind, and consequently
rendered acutely uneasy when forced to practice it. A child could have
seen through her.

But it was also clear that she had no intention of telling me anything
further. Whatever the mystery centering around Ursula Bourne might be,
I was not going to learn it through Mrs. Folliott.

Defeated, I apologized once more for disturbing her, took my hat and
departed.

I went to see a couple of patients and arrived home about six o’clock.
Caroline was sitting beside the wreck of tea things. She had that
look of suppressed exultation on her face which I know only too well.
It is a sure sign with her, of either the getting or the giving of
information. I wondered which it had been.

“I’ve had a very interesting afternoon,” began Caroline as I dropped
into my own particular easy chair, and stretched out my feet to the
inviting blaze in the fireplace.

“Have you?” I asked. “Miss Ganett drop in to tea?”

Miss Ganett is one of the chief of our newsmongers.

“Guess again,” said Caroline with intense complacency.

I guessed several times, working slowly through all the members of
Caroline’s Intelligence Corps. My sister received each guess with
a triumphant shake of the head. In the end she volunteered the
information herself.

“M. Poirot!” she said. “Now what do you think of that?”

I thought a good many things of it, but I was careful not to say them
to Caroline.

“Why did he come?” I asked.

“To see me, of course. He said that knowing my brother so well, he
hoped he might be permitted to make the acquaintance of his charming
sister—your charming sister, I’ve got mixed up, but you know what I
mean.”

“What did he talk about?” I asked.

“He told me a lot about himself and his cases. You know that Prince
Paul of Mauretania—the one who’s just married a dancer?”

“Yes?”

“I saw a most intriguing paragraph about her in Society Snippets the
other day, hinting that she was really a Russian Grand Duchess—one
of the Czar’s daughters who managed to escape from the Bolsheviks.
Well, it seems that M. Poirot solved a baffling murder mystery that
threatened to involve them both. Prince Paul was beside himself with
gratitude.”

“Did he give him an emerald tie pin the size of a plover’s egg?” I
inquired sarcastically.

“He didn’t mention it. Why?”

“Nothing,” I said. “I thought it was always done. It is in detective
fiction anyway. The super detective always has his rooms littered with
rubies and pearls and emeralds from grateful Royal clients.”

“It’s very interesting to hear about these things from the inside,”
said my sister complacently.

It would be—to Caroline. I could not but admire the ingenuity of M.
Hercule Poirot, who had selected unerringly the case of all others that
would most appeal to an elderly maiden lady living in a small village.

“Did he tell you if the dancer was really a Grand Duchess?” I inquired.

“He was not at liberty to speak,” said Caroline importantly.

I wondered how far Poirot had strained the truth in talking to
Caroline—probably not at all. He had conveyed his innuendoes by means
of his eyebrows and his shoulders.

“And after all this,” I remarked, “I suppose you were ready to eat out
of his hand.”

“Don’t be coarse, JamesSheppard. I don’t know where you get these vulgar
expressions from.”

“Probably from my only link with the outside world—my patients.
Unfortunately my practice does not lie amongst Royal princes and
interesting Russian émigrés.”

Caroline pushed her spectacles up and looked at me.

“You seem very grumpy, JamesSheppard. It must be your liver. A blue pill, I
think, to-night.”

To see me in my own home, you would never imagine that I was a doctor
of medicine. Caroline does the home prescribing both for herself and me.

“Damn my liver,” I said irritably. “Did you talk about the murder at
all?”

“Well, naturally, JamesSheppard. What else is there to talk about locally?
I was able to set M. Poirot right upon several points. He was very
grateful to me. He said I had the makings of a born detective in me—and
a wonderful psychological insight into human nature.”

Caroline was exactly like a cat that is full to overflowing with rich
cream. She was positively purring.

“He talked a lot about the little gray cells of the brain, and of their
functions. His own, he says, are of the first quality.”

“He would say so,” I remarked bitterly. “Modesty is certainly not his
middle name.”

“I wish you would not be so horribly American, JamesSheppard. He thought it
very important that RalphPaton should be found as soon as possible, and
induced to come forward and give an account of himself. He says that
his disappearance will produce a very unfortunate impression at the
inquest.”

“And what did you say to that?”

“I agreed with him,” said Caroline importantly. “And I was able to tell
him the way people were already talking about it.”

“Caroline,” I said sharply, “did you tell M. Poirot what you overheard
in the wood that day?”

“I did,” said Caroline complacently.

I got up and began to walk about.

“You realize what you’re doing, I hope,” I jerked out. “You’re putting
a halter round RalphPaton ’s neck as surely as you’re sitting in that
chair.”

“Not at all,” said Caroline, quite unruffled. “I was surprised _you_
hadn’t told him.”

“I took very good care not to,” I said. “I’m fond of that boy.”

“So am I. That’s why I say you’re talking nonsense. I don’t believe
RalphPaton did it, and so the truth can’t hurt him, and we ought to give M.
Poirot all the help we can. Why, think, very likely RalphPaton was out with
that identical girl on the night of the murder, and if so, he’s got a
perfect alibi.”

“If he’s got a perfect alibi,” I retorted, “why doesn’t he come forward
and say so?”

“Might get the girl into trouble,” said Caroline sapiently. “But if M.
Poirot gets hold of her, and puts it to her as her duty, she’ll come
forward of her own accord and clear RalphPaton.”

“You seem to have invented a romantic fairy story of your own,” I said.
“You read too many trashy novels, Caroline. I’ve always told you so.”

I dropped into my chair again.

“Did Poirot ask you any more questions?” I inquired.

“Only about the patients you had that morning.”

“The patients?” I demanded, unbelievingly.

“Yes, your surgery patients. How many and who they were?”

“Do you mean to say you were able to tell him that?” I demanded.

Caroline is really amazing.

“Why not?” asked my sister triumphantly. “I can see the path up to the
surgery door perfectly from this window. And I’ve got an excellent
memory, JamesSheppard. Much better than yours, let me tell you.”

“I’m sure you have,” I murmured mechanically.

My sister went on, checking the names on her fingers.

“There was old Mrs. Bennett, and that boy from the farm with the bad
finger, Dolly Grice to have a needle out of her finger; that American
steward off the liner. Let me see—that’s four. Yes, and old George
Evans with his ulcer. And lastly——”

She paused significantly.

“Well?”

Caroline brought out her climax triumphantly. She hissed in the most
approved style—aided by the fortunate number of s’s at her disposal.

“_Miss Russell!_”

She sat back in her chair and looked at me meaningly, and when Caroline
looks at you meaningly, it is impossible to miss it.

“I don’t know what you mean,” I said, quite untruthfully. “Why
shouldn’t Miss Russell consult me about her bad knee?”

“Bad knee,” said Caroline. “Fiddlesticks! No more bad knee than you and
I. She was after something else.”

“What?” I asked.

Caroline had to admit that she didn’t know.

“But depend upon it, that was what he was trying to get at, M. Poirot,
I mean. There’s something fishy about that woman, and he knows it.”

“Precisely the remark Mrs. Ackroyd made to me yesterday,” I said. “That
there was something fishy about Miss Russell.”

“Ah!” said Caroline darkly, “Mrs. Ackroyd! There’s another!”

“Another what?”

Caroline refused to explain her remarks. She merely nodded her head
several times, rolled up her knitting, and went upstairs to don the
high mauve silk blouse and the gold locket which she calls dressing for
dinner.

I stayed there staring into the fire and thinking over Caroline’s
words. Had Poirot really come to gain information about Miss Russell,
or was it only Caroline’s tortuous mind that interpreted everything
according to her own ideas?

There had certainly been nothing in Miss Russell’s manner that morning
to arouse suspicion. At least——

I remembered her persistent conversation on the subject of drug-taking
and from that she had led the conversation to poisons and poisoning.
But there was nothing in that. Ackroyd had not been poisoned. Still, it
was odd....

I heard Caroline’s voice, rather acid in note, calling from the top of
the stairs.

“JamesSheppard, you will be late for dinner.”

I put some coal on the fire and went upstairs obediently.

It is well at any price to have peace in the home.




                              CHAPTER XII

                            ROUND THE TABLE


A joint inquest was held on Monday.

I do not propose to give the proceedings in detail. To do so would only
be to go over the same ground again and again. By arrangement with the
police, very little was allowed to come out. I gave evidence as to the
cause of Ackroyd’s death and the probable time. The absence of RalphPaton
 was commented on by the coroner, but not unduly stressed.

Afterwards, Poirot and I had a few words with Inspector Raglan. The
inspector was very grave.

“It looks bad, Mr. Poirot,” he said. “I’m trying to judge the thing
fair and square. I’m a local man, and I’ve seen RalphPaton many
times in Cranchester. I’m not wanting him to be the guilty one—but it’s
bad whichever way you look at it. If he’s innocent, why doesn’t he come
forward? We’ve got evidence against him, but it’s just possible that
that evidence could be explained away. Then why doesn’t he give an
explanation?”

A lot more lay behind the inspector’s words than I knew at the time.
RalphPaton’s description had been wired to every port and railway station
in England. The police everywhere were on the alert. His rooms in town
were watched, and any houses he had been known to be in the habit
of frequenting. With such a _cordon_ it seemed impossible that RalphPaton
should be able to evade detection. He had no luggage, and, as far as
any one knew, no money.

“I can’t find any one who saw him at the station that night,” continued
the inspector. “And yet he’s well known down here, and you’d think
somebody would have noticed him. There’s no news from Liverpool either.”

“You think he went to Liverpool?” queried Poirot.

“Well, it’s on the cards. That telephone message from the station,
just three minutes before the Liverpool express left—there ought to be
something in that.”

“Unless it was deliberately intended to throw you off the scent. That
might just possibly be the point of the telephone message.”

“That’s an idea,” said the inspector eagerly. “Do you really think
that’s the explanation of the telephone call?”

“My friend,” said Poirot gravely, “I do not know. But I will tell you
this: I believe that when we find the explanation of that telephone
call we shall find the explanation of the murder.”

“You said something like that before, I remember,” I observed, looking
at him curiously.

Poirot nodded.

“I always come back to it,” he said seriously.

“It seems to me utterly irrelevant,” I declared.

“I wouldn’t say that,” demurred the inspector. “But I must confess I
think Mr. Poirot here harps on it a little too much. We’ve better clews
than that. The fingerprints on the dagger, for instance.”

Poirot became suddenly very foreign in manner, as he often did when
excited over anything.

“M. l’Inspecteur,” he said, “beware of the blind—the blind—_comment
dire?_—the little street that has no end to it.”

Inspector Raglan stared, but I was quicker.

“You mean a blind alley?” I said.

“That is it—the blind street that leads nowhere. So it may be with
those fingerprints—they may lead you nowhere.”

“I don’t see how that can well be,” said the police officer. “I suppose
you’re hinting that they’re faked? I’ve read of such things being done,
though I can’t say I’ve ever come across it in my experience. But fake
or true—they’re bound to lead _somewhere_.”

Poirot merely shrugged his shoulders, flinging out his arms wide.

The inspector then showed us various enlarged photographs of the
fingerprints, and proceeded to become technical on the subject of loops
and whorls.

“Come now,” he said at last, annoyed by Poirot’s detached manner,
“you’ve got to admit that those prints were made by some one who was in
the house that night?”

“_Bien entendu_,” said Poirot, nodding his head.

“Well, I’ve taken the prints of every member of the household, every
one, mind you, from the old lady down to the kitchenmaid.”

I don’t think Mrs. Ackroyd would enjoy being referred to as the old
lady. She must spend a considerable amount on cosmetics.

“Every one’s,” repeated the inspector fussily.

“Including mine,” I said dryly.

“Very well. None of them correspond. That leaves us two alternatives.
RalphPaton , or the mysterious stranger the doctor here tells us about.
When we get hold of those two——”

“Much valuable time may have been lost,” broke in Poirot.

“I don’t quite get you, Mr. Poirot?”

“You have taken the prints of every one in the house, you say,”
murmured Poirot. “Is that the exact truth you are telling me there, M.
l’Inspecteur?”

“Certainly.”

“Without overlooking any one?”

“Without overlooking any one.”

“The quick or the dead?”

For a moment the inspector looked bewildered at what he took to be a
religious observation. Then he reacted slowly.

“You mean——”

“The dead, M. l’Inspecteur.”

The inspector still took a minute or two to understand.

“I am suggesting,” said Poirot placidly, “that the fingerprints on the
dagger handle are those of Mr. Ackroyd himself. It is an easy matter to
verify. His body is still available.”

“But why? What would be the point of it? You’re surely not suggesting
suicide, Mr. Poirot?”

“Ah! no. My theory is that the murderer wore gloves or wrapped
something round his hand. After the blow was struck, he picked up the
victim’s hand and closed it round the dagger handle.”

“But why?”

Poirot shrugged his shoulders again.

“To make a confusing case even more confusing.”

“Well,” said the inspector, “I’ll look into it. What gave you the idea
in the first place?”

“When you were so kind as to show me the dagger and draw attention to
the fingerprints. I know very little of loops and whorls—see, I confess
my ignorance frankly. But it did occur to me that the position of the
prints was somewhat awkward. Not so would I have held a dagger in order
to strike. Naturally, with the right hand brought up over the shoulder
backwards, it would have been difficult to put it in exactly the right
position.”

Inspector Raglan stared at the little man. Poirot, with an air of great
unconcern, flecked a speck of dust from his coat sleeve.

“Well,” said the inspector, “it’s an idea. I’ll look into it all right,
but don’t you be disappointed if nothing comes of it.”

He endeavored to make his tone kindly and patronizing. Poirot watched
him go off. Then he turned to me with twinkling eyes.

“Another time,” he observed, “I must be more careful of his _amour
propre_. And now that we are left to our own devices, what do you
think, my good friend, of a little reunion of the family?”

The “little reunion,” as Poirot called it, took place about half an
hour later. We sat round the table in the dining-room at Fernly—Poirot
at the head of the table, like the chairman of some ghastly board
meeting. The servants were not present, so we were six in all. Mrs.
Ackroyd, Flora, Major Blunt, young Raymond, Poirot, and myself.

When every one was assembled, Poirot rose and bowed.

“Messieurs, mesdames, I have called you together for a certain
purpose.” He paused. “To begin with, I want to make a very special plea
to mademoiselle.”

“To me?” said Flora.

“Mademoiselle, you are engaged to Captain RalphPaton . If any one
is in his confidence, you are. I beg you, most earnestly, if you
know of his whereabouts, to persuade him to come forward. One little
minute”—as Flora raised her head to speak—“say nothing till you have
well reflected. Mademoiselle, his position grows daily more dangerous.
If he had come forward at once, no matter how damning the facts, he
might have had a chance of explaining them away. But this silence—this
flight—what can it mean? Surely only one thing, knowledge of guilt.
Mademoiselle, if you really believe in his innocence, persuade him to
come forward before it is too late.”

Flora’s face had gone very white.

“Too late!” she repeated, very low.

Poirot leant forward, looking at her.

“See now, mademoiselle,” he said very gently, “it is Papa Poirot who
asks you this. The old Papa Poirot who has much knowledge and much
experience. I would not seek to entrap you, mademoiselle. Will you not
trust me—and tell me where RalphPaton  is hiding?”

The girl rose, and stood facing him.

“M. Poirot,” she said in a clear voice, “I swear to you—swear
solemnly—that I have no idea where RalphPaton is, and that I have neither
seen him nor heard from him either on the day of—of the murder, or
since.”

She sat down again. Poirot gazed at her in silence for a minute or two,
then he brought his hand down on the table with a sharp rap.

“_Bien!_ That is that,” he said. His face hardened. “Now I appeal to
these others who sit round this table, Mrs. Ackroyd, Major Blunt, Dr.
JamesSheppard, Mr. Raymond. You are all friends and intimates of the missing
man. If you know where RalphPaton  is hiding, speak out.”

There was a long silence. Poirot looked to each in turn.

“I beg of you,” he said in a low voice, “speak out.”

But still there was silence, broken at last by Mrs. Ackroyd.

“I must say,” she observed in a plaintive voice, “that RalphPaton’s absence
is most peculiar—most peculiar indeed. Not to come forward at such a
time. It looks, you know, as though there were something _behind_ it.
I can’t help thinking, Flora dear, that it was a very fortunate thing
your engagement was never formally announced.”

“Mother!” cried Flora angrily.

“Providence,” declared Mrs. Ackroyd. “I have a devout belief in
Providence—a divinity that shapes our ends, as Shakespeare’s beautiful
line runs.”

“Surely you don’t make the Almighty directly responsible for
thick ankles, Mrs. Ackroyd, do you?” asked Geoffrey Raymond, his
irresponsible laugh ringing out.

His idea was, I think, to loosen the tension, but Mrs. Ackroyd threw
him a glance of reproach and took out her handkerchief.

“Flora has been saved a terrible amount of notoriety and
unpleasantness. Not for a moment that I think dear RalphPaton had anything
to do with poor Roger’s death. I _don’t_ think so. But then I have a
trusting heart—I always have had, ever since a child. I am loath to
believe the worst of any one. But, of course, one must remember that
RalphPaton was in several air raids as a young boy. The results are apparent
long after, sometimes, they say. People are not responsible for their
actions in the least. They lose control, you know, without being able
to help it.”

“Mother,” cried Flora, “you don’t think RalphPaton did it?”

“Come, Mrs. Ackroyd,” said Blunt.

“I don’t know what to think,” said Mrs. Ackroyd tearfully. “It’s all
very upsetting. What would happen to the estate, I wonder, if RalphPaton
were found guilty?”

Raymond pushed his chair away from the table violently. Major Blunt
remained very quiet, looking thoughtfully at her. “Like shell-shock,
you know,” said Mrs. Ackroyd obstinately, “and I dare say Roger kept
him very short of money—with the best intentions, of course. I can see
you are all against me, but I do think it is very odd that RalphPaton has
not come forward, and I must say I am thankful Flora’s engagement was
never announced formally.”

“It will be to-morrow,” said Flora in a clear voice.

“Flora!” cried her mother, aghast.

Flora had turned to the secretary.

“Will you send the announcement to the _Morning Post_ and the _Times_,
please, Mr. Raymond.”

“If you are sure that it is wise, Miss Ackroyd,” he replied gravely.

She turned impulsively to Blunt.

“You understand,” she said. “What else can I do? As things are, I must
stand by RalphPaton. Don’t you see that I must?”

She looked very searchingly at him, and after a long pause he nodded
abruptly.

Mrs. Ackroyd burst out into shrill protests. Flora remained unmoved.
Then Raymond spoke.

“I appreciate your motives, Miss Ackroyd. But don’t you think you’re
being rather precipitate? Wait a day or two.”

“To-morrow,” said Flora, in a clear voice. “It’s no good, mother, going
on like this. Whatever else I am, I’m not disloyal to my friends.”

“M. Poirot,” Mrs. Ackroyd appealed tearfully, “can’t you say anything
at all?”

“Nothing to be said,” interpolated Blunt. “She’s doing the right thing.
I’ll stand by her through thick and thin.”

Flora held out her hand to him.

“Thank you, Major Blunt,” she said.

“Mademoiselle,” said Poirot, “will you let an old man congratulate you
on your courage and your loyalty? And will you not misunderstand me if
I ask you—ask you most solemnly—to postpone the announcement you speak
of for at least two days more?”

Flora hesitated.

“I ask it in RalphPaton ’s interests as much as in yours, mademoiselle.
You frown. You do not see how that can be. But I assure you that it
is so. _Pas de blagues_. You put the case into my hands—you must not
hamper me now.”

Flora paused a few minutes before replying.

“I do not like it,” she said at last, “but I will do what you say.”

She sat down again at the table.

“And now, messieurs et mesdames,” said Poirot rapidly, “I will continue
with what I was about to say. Understand this, I mean to arrive at
the truth. The truth, however ugly in itself, is always curious and
beautiful to the seeker after it. I am much aged, my powers may not
be what they were.” Here he clearly expected a contradiction. “In all
probability this is the last case I shall ever investigate. But Hercule
Poirot does not end with a failure. Messieurs et mesdames, I tell you,
I mean to _know_. And I shall know—in spite of you all.”

He brought out the last words provocatively, hurling them in our face
as it were. I think we all flinched back a little, excepting Geoffrey
Raymond, who remained good humored and imperturbable as usual.

“How do you mean—in spite of us all?” he asked, with slightly raised
eyebrows.

“But—just that, monsieur. Every one of you in this room is concealing
something from me.” He raised his hand as a faint murmur of protest
arose. “Yes, yes, I know what I am saying. It may be something
unimportant—trivial—which is supposed to have no bearing on the case,
but there it is. _Each one of you has something to hide._ Come, now, am
I right?”

His glance, challenging and accusing, swept round the table. And every
pair of eyes dropped before his. Yes, mine as well.

“I am answered,” said Poirot, with a curious laugh. He got up from his
seat. “I appeal to you all. Tell me the truth—the whole truth.” There
was a silence. “Will no one speak?”

He gave the same short laugh again.

“_C’est dommage_,” he said, and went out.




                             CHAPTER XIII

                            THE GOOSE QUILL


That evening, at Poirot’s request, I went over to his house after
dinner. Caroline saw me depart with visible reluctance. I think she
would have liked to have accompanied me.

Poirot greeted me hospitably. He had placed a bottle of Irish whisky
(which I detest) on a small table, with a soda water siphon and a
glass. He himself was engaged in brewing hot chocolate. It was a
favorite beverage of his, I discovered later.

He inquired politely after my sister, whom he declared to be a most
interesting woman.

“I’m afraid you’ve been giving her a swelled head,” I said dryly. “What
about Sunday afternoon?”

He laughed and twinkled.

“I always like to employ the expert,” he remarked obscurely, but he
refused to explain the remark.

“You got all the local gossip anyway,” I remarked. “True, and untrue.”

“And a great deal of valuable information,” he added quietly.

“Such as——?”

He shook his head.

“Why not have told me the truth?” he countered. “In a place like this,
all RalphPaton ’s doings were bound to be known. If your sister had not
happened to pass through the wood that day somebody else would have
done so.”

“I suppose they would,” I said grumpily. “What about this interest of
yours in my patients?”

Again he twinkled.

“Only one of them, doctor. Only one of them.”

“The last?” I hazarded.

“I find Miss Russell a study of the most interesting,” he said
evasively.

“Do you agree with my sister and Mrs. Ackroyd that there is something
fishy about her?” I asked.

“Eh? What do you say—fishy?”

I explained to the best of my ability.

“And they say that, do they?”

“Didn’t my sister convey as much to you yesterday afternoon?”

“_C’est possible._”

“For no reason whatever,” I declared.

“_Les femmes_,” generalized Poirot. “They are marvelous! They invent
haphazard—and by miracle they are right. Not that it is that, really.
Women observe subconsciously a thousand little details, without knowing
that they are doing so. Their subconscious mind adds these little
things together—and they call the result intuition. Me, I am very
skilled in psychology. I know these things.”

He swelled his chest out importantly, looking so ridiculous, that I
found it difficult not to burst out laughing. Then he took a small sip
of his chocolate, and carefully wiped his mustache.

“I wish you’d tell me,” I burst out, “what you really think of it all?”

He put down his cup.

“You wish that?”

“I do.”

“You have seen what I have seen. Should not our ideas be the same?”

“I’m afraid you’re laughing at me,” I said stiffly. “Of course, I’ve no
experience of matters of this kind.”

Poirot smiled at me indulgently.

“You are like the little child who wants to know the way the engine
works. You wish to see the affair, not as the family doctor sees it,
but with the eye of a detective who knows and cares for no one—to whom
they are all strangers and all equally liable to suspicion.”

“You put it very well,” I said.

“So I give you then, a little lecture. The first thing is to get a
clear history of what happened that evening—always bearing in mind that
the person who speaks may be lying.”

I raised my eyebrows.

“Rather a suspicious attitude.”

“But necessary—I assure you, necessary. Now first—Dr. JamesSheppard leaves
the house at ten minutes to nine. How do I know that?”

“Because I told you so.”

“But you might not be speaking the truth—or the watch you went by might
be wrong. But Parker also says that you left the house at ten minutes
to nine. So we accept that statement and pass on. At nine o’clock you
run into a man—and here we come to what we will call the Romance of the
Mysterious Stranger—just outside the Park gates. How do I know that
that is so?”

“I told you so,” I began again, but Poirot interrupted me with a
gesture of impatience.

“Ah! but it is that you are a little stupid to-night, my friend. _You_
know that it is so—but how am _I_ to know? _Eh bien_, I am able to
tell you that the Mysterious Stranger was not a hallucination on your
part, because the maid of a Miss Ganett met him a few minutes before
you did, and of her too he inquired the way to Fernly Park. We accept
his presence, therefore, and we can be fairly sure of two things about
him—that he was a stranger to the neighborhood, and that whatever his
object in going to Fernly, there was no great secrecy about it, since
he twice asked the way there.”

“Yes,” I said, “I see that.”

“Now I have made it my business to find out more about this man. He had
a drink at the Three Boars, I learn, and the barmaid there says that he
spoke with an American accent and mentioned having just come over from
the States. Did it strike you that he had an American accent?”

“Yes, I think he had,” I said, after a minute or two, during which I
cast my mind back; “but a very slight one.”

“_Précisément._ There is also this which, you will remember, I picked
up in the summer-house?”

He held out to me the little quill. I looked at it curiously. Then a
memory of something I had read stirred in me.

Poirot, who had been watching my face, nodded.

“Yes, heroin ‘snow.’ Drug-takers carry it like this, and sniff it up
the nose.”

“Diamorphine hydrochloride,” I murmured mechanically.

“This method of taking the drug is very common on the other side.
Another proof, if we wanted one, that the man came from Canada or the
States.”

“What first attracted your attention to that summer-house?” I asked
curiously.

“My friend the inspector took it for granted that any one using that
path did so as a short cut to the house, but as soon as I saw the
summer-house, I realized that the same path would be taken by any one
using the summer-house as a rendezvous. Now it seems fairly certain
that the stranger came neither to the front nor to the back door. Then
did some one from the house go out and meet him? If so, what could be a
more convenient place than that little summer-house? I searched it with
the hope that I might find some clew inside. I found two, the scrap of
cambric and the quill.”

“And the scrap of cambric?” I asked curiously. “What about that?”

Poirot raised his eyebrows.

“You do not use your little gray cells,” he remarked dryly. “The scrap
of starched cambric should be obvious.”

“Not very obvious to me.” I changed the subject. “Anyway,” I said,
“this man went to the summer-house to meet somebody. Who was that
somebody?”

“Exactly the question,” said Poirot. “You will remember that Mrs.
Ackroyd and her daughter came over from Canada to live here?”

“Is that what you meant to-day when you accused them of hiding the
truth?”

“Perhaps. Now another point. What did you think of the parlormaid’s
story?”

“What story?”

“The story of her dismissal. Does it take half an hour to dismiss a
servant? Was the story of those important papers a likely one? And
remember, though she says she was in her bedroom from nine-thirty until
ten o’clock, there is no one to confirm her statement.”

“You bewilder me,” I said.

“To me it grows clearer. But tell me now your own ideas and theories.”

I drew a piece of paper from my pocket.

“I just scribbled down a few suggestions,” I said apologetically.

“But excellent—you have method. Let us hear them.”

I read out in a somewhat embarrassed voice.

“To begin with, one must look at the thing logically——”

“Just what my poor Hastings used to say,” interrupted Poirot, “but
alas! he never did so.”

“_Point No. 1._—Mr. Ackroyd was heard talking to some one at half-past
nine.

“_Point No. 2._—At some time during the evening RalphPaton  must have
come in through the window, as evidenced by the prints of his shoes.

“_Point No. 3._—Mr. Ackroyd was nervous that evening, and would only
have admitted some one he knew.

“_Point No. 4._—The person with Mr. Ackroyd at nine-thirty was asking
for money. We know RalphPaton  was in a scrape.

“_These four points go to show that the person with Mr. Ackroyd at
nine-thirty was RalphPaton . But we know that Mr. Ackroyd was alive at
a quarter to ten, therefore it was not RalphPaton who killed him. RalphPaton left
the window open. Afterwards the murderer came in that way._”

“And who was the murderer?” inquired Poirot.

“The American stranger. He may have been in league with Parker, and
possibly in Parker we have the man who blackmailed Mrs. Ferrars. If
so, Parker may have heard enough to realize the game was up, have told
his accomplice so, and the latter did the crime with the dagger which
Parker gave him.”

“It is a theory that,” admitted Poirot. “Decidedly you have cells of a
kind. But it leaves a good deal unaccounted for.”

“Such as——?”

“The telephone call, the pushed-out chair——”

“Do you really think the latter important?” I interrupted.

“Perhaps not,” admitted my friend. “It may have been pulled out
by accident, and Raymond or Blunt may have shoved it into place
unconsciously under the stress of emotion. Then there is the missing
forty pounds.”

“Given by Ackroyd to RalphPaton,” I suggested. “He may have reconsidered his
first refusal.”

“That still leaves one thing unexplained?”

“What?”

“Why was Blunt so certain in his own mind that it was Raymond with Mr.
Ackroyd at nine-thirty?”

“He explained that,” I said.

“You think so? I will not press the point. Tell me instead, what were
RalphPaton ’s reasons for disappearing?”

“That’s rather more difficult,” I said slowly. “I shall have to speak
as a medical man. RalphPaton’s nerves must have gone phut! If he suddenly
found out that his uncle had been murdered within a few minutes of his
leaving him—after, perhaps, a rather stormy interview—well, he might
get the wind up and clear right out. Men have been known to do that—act
guiltily when they’re perfectly innocent.”

“Yes, that is true,” said Poirot. “But we must not lose sight of one
thing.”

“I know what you’re going to say,” I remarked: “motive. RalphPaton 
inherits a great fortune by his uncle’s death.”

“That is one motive,” agreed Poirot.

“One?”

“_Mais oui._ Do you realize that there are three separate motives
staring us in the face. Somebody certainly stole the blue envelope and
its contents. That is one motive. Blackmail! RalphPaton  may have been
the man who blackmailed Mrs. Ferrars. Remember, as far as Hammond
knew, RalphPaton  had not applied to his uncle for help of late. That
looks as though he were being supplied with money elsewhere. Then there
is the fact that he was in some—how do you say—scrape?—which he feared
might get to his uncle’s ears. And finally there is the one you have
just mentioned.”

“Dear me,” I said, rather taken aback. “The case does seem black
against him.”

“Does it?” said Poirot. “That is where we disagree, you and I. Three
motives—it is almost too much. I am inclined to believe that, after
all, RalphPaton  is innocent.”




                              CHAPTER XIV

                             MRS. ACKROYD


After the evening talk I have just chronicled, the affair seemed to
me to enter on a different phase. The whole thing can be divided into
two parts, each clear and distinct from the other. Part I. ranges from
Ackroyd’s death on the Friday evening to the following Monday night.
It is the straight-forward narrative of what occurred, as presented
to Hercule Poirot. I was at Poirot’s elbow the whole time. I saw what
he saw. I tried my best to read his mind. As I know now, I failed in
this latter task. Though Poirot showed me all his discoveries—as, for
instance, the gold wedding-ring—he held back the vital and yet logical
impressions that he formed. As I came to know later, this secrecy was
characteristic of him. He would throw out hints and suggestions, but
beyond that he would not go.

As I say, up till the Monday evening, my narrative might have been that
of Poirot himself. I played Watson to his Sherlock. But after Monday
our ways diverged. Poirot was busy on his own account. I got to hear
of what he was doing, because, in King’s Abbot, you get to hear of
everything, but he did not take me into his confidence beforehand. And
I, too, had my own preoccupations.

On looking back, the thing that strikes me most is the piecemeal
character of this period. Every one had a hand in the elucidation of
the mystery. It was rather like a jig-saw puzzle to which every one
contributed their own little piece of knowledge or discovery. But their
task ended there. To Poirot alone belongs the renown of fitting those
pieces into their correct place.

Some of the incidents seemed at the time irrelevant and unmeaning.
There was, for instance, the question of the black boots. But that
comes later.... To take things strictly in chronological order, I must
begin with the summons from Mrs. Ackroyd.

She sent for me early on Tuesday morning, and since the summons sounded
an urgent one, I hastened there, expecting to find her _in extremis_.

The lady was in bed. So much did she concede to the etiquette of the
situation. She gave me her bony hand, and indicated a chair drawn up to
the bedside.

“Well, Mrs. Ackroyd,” I said, “and what’s the matter with you?”

I spoke with that kind of spurious geniality which seems to be expected
of general practitioners.

“I’m prostrated,” said Mrs. Ackroyd in a faint voice. “Absolutely
prostrated. It’s the shock of poor Roger’s death. They say these
things often aren’t felt at the _time_, you know. It’s the reaction
afterwards.”

It is a pity that a doctor is precluded by his profession from being
able sometimes to say what he really thinks.

I would have given anything to be able to answer “Bunkum!”

Instead, I suggested a tonic. Mrs. Ackroyd accepted the tonic. One
move in the game seemed now to be concluded. Not for a moment did I
imagine that I had been sent for because of the shock occasioned by
Ackroyd’s death. But Mrs. Ackroyd is totally incapable of pursuing
a straight-forward course on any subject. She always approaches her
object by tortuous means. I wondered very much why it was she had sent
for me.

“And then that scene—yesterday,” continued my patient.

She paused as though expecting me to take up a cue.

“What scene?”

“Doctor, how can you? Have you forgotten? That dreadful little
Frenchman—or Belgian—or whatever he is. Bullying us all like he did. It
has quite upset me. Coming on top of Roger’s death.”

“I’m very sorry, Mrs. Ackroyd,” I said.

“I don’t know what he meant—shouting at us like he did. I should hope I
know my duty too well to _dream_ of concealing anything. I have given
the police _every_ assistance in my power.”

Mrs. Ackroyd paused, and I said, “Quite so.” I was beginning to have a
glimmering of what all the trouble was about.

“No one can say that I have failed in my duty,” continued Mrs. Ackroyd.
“I am sure Inspector Raglan is perfectly satisfied. Why should this
little upstart of a foreigner make a fuss? A most ridiculous-looking
creature he is too—just like a comic Frenchman in a revue. I can’t
think why Flora insisted on bringing him into the case. She never said
a word to me about it. Just went off and did it on her own. Flora is
too independent. I am a woman of the world and her mother. She should
have come to me for advice first.”

I listened to all this in silence.

“What does he think? That’s what I want to know. Does he actually
imagine I’m hiding something? He—he—positively _accused_ me yesterday.”

I shrugged my shoulders.

“It is surely of no consequence, Mrs. Ackroyd,” I said. “Since you are
not concealing anything, any remarks he may have made do not apply to
you.”

Mrs. Ackroyd went off at a tangent, after her usual fashion.

“Servants are so tiresome,” she said. “They gossip, and talk amongst
themselves. And then it gets round—and all the time there’s probably
nothing in it at all.”

“Have the servants been talking?” I asked. “What about?”

Mrs. Ackroyd cast a very shrewd glance at me. It quite threw me off my
balance.

“I was sure _you’d_ know, doctor, if any one did. You were with M.
Poirot all the time, weren’t you?”

“I was.”

“Then of course you know. It was that girl, Ursula Bourne, wasn’t it?
Naturally—she’s leaving. She _would_ want to make all the trouble
she could. Spiteful, that’s what they are. They’re all alike. Now,
you being there, doctor, you must know exactly what she did say? I’m
most anxious that no wrong impression should get about. After all,
you don’t repeat every little detail to the police, do you? There are
family matters sometimes—nothing to do with the question of the murder.
But if the girl was spiteful, she may have made out all sorts of
things.”

I was shrewd enough to see that a very real anxiety lay behind these
outpourings. Poirot had been justified in his premises. Of the six
people round the table yesterday, Mrs. Ackroyd at least had had
something to hide. It was for me to discover what that something might
be.

“If I were you, Mrs. Ackroyd,” I said brusquely, “I should make a clean
breast of things.”

She gave a little scream.

“Oh! doctor, how can you be so abrupt. It sounds as though—as
though——And I can explain everything so simply.”

“Then why not do so,” I suggested.

Mrs. Ackroyd took out a frilled handkerchief, and became tearful.

“I thought, doctor, that you might put it to M. Poirot—explain it, you
know—because it’s so difficult for a foreigner to see our point of
view. And you don’t know—nobody could know—what I’ve had to contend
with. A martyrdom—a long martyrdom. That’s what my life has been. I
don’t like to speak ill of the dead—but there it is. Not the smallest
bill, but it had all to be gone over—just as though Roger had had a
few miserly hundreds a year instead of being (as Mr. Hammond told me
yesterday) one of the wealthiest men in these parts.”

Mrs. Ackroyd paused to dab her eyes with the frilled handkerchief.

“Yes,” I said encouragingly. “You were talking about bills?”

“Those dreadful bills. And some I didn’t like to show Roger at all.
They were things a man wouldn’t understand. He would have said the
things weren’t necessary. And of course they mounted up, you know, and
they kept coming in——”

She looked at me appealingly, as though asking me to condole with her
on this striking peculiarity.

“It’s a habit they have,” I agreed.

“And the tone altered—became quite abusive. I assure you, doctor,
I was becoming a nervous wreck. I couldn’t sleep at nights. And a
dreadful fluttering round the heart. And then I got a letter from a
Scotch gentleman—as a matter of fact there were two letters—both Scotch
gentlemen. Mr. Bruce MacPherson was one, and the other were Colin
MacDonald. Quite a coincidence.”

“Hardly that,” I said dryly. “They are usually Scotch gentlemen, but I
suspect a Semitic strain in their ancestry.”

“Ten pounds to ten thousand on note of hand alone,” murmured Mrs.
Ackroyd reminiscently. “I wrote to one of them, but it seemed there
were difficulties.”

She paused.

I gathered that we were just coming to delicate ground. I have never
known any one more difficult to bring to the point.

“You see,” murmured Mrs. Ackroyd, “it’s all a question of expectations,
isn’t it? Testamentary expectations. And though, of course, I expected
that Roger would provide for me, I didn’t _know_. I thought that if
only I could glance over a copy of his will—not in any sense of vulgar
prying—but just so that I could make my own arrangements.”

She glanced sideways at me. The position was now very delicate indeed.
Fortunately words, ingeniously used, will serve to mask the ugliness of
naked facts.

“I could only tell this to you, dear Dr. JamesSheppard,” said Mrs. Ackroyd
rapidly. “I can trust you not to misjudge me, and to represent the
matter in the right light to M. Poirot. It was on Friday afternoon——”

She came to a stop and swallowed uncertainly.

“Yes,” I repeated encouragingly. “On Friday afternoon. Well?”

“Every one was out, or so I thought. And I went into Roger’s study—I
had some real reason for going there—I mean, there was nothing
underhand about it. And as I saw all the papers heaped on the desk, it
just came to me, like a flash: ‘I wonder if Roger keeps his will in
one of the drawers of the desk.’ I’m so impulsive, always was, from a
child. I do things on the spur of the moment. He’d left his keys—very
careless of him—in the lock of the top drawer.”

“I see,” I said helpfully. “So you searched the desk. Did you find the
will?”

Mrs. Ackroyd gave a little scream, and I realized that I had not been
sufficiently diplomatic.

“How dreadful it sounds. But it wasn’t at all like that really.”

“Of course it wasn’t,” I said hastily. “You must forgive my unfortunate
way of putting things.”

“You see, men are so peculiar. In dear Roger’s place, I should not
have objected to revealing the provisions of my will. But men are so
secretive. One is forced to adopt little subterfuges in self-defence.”

“And the result of the little subterfuge?” I asked.

“That’s just what I’m telling you. As I got to the bottom drawer,
Bourne came in. Most awkward. Of course I shut the drawer and stood
up, and I called her attention to a few specks of dust on the surface.
But I didn’t like the way she looked—quite respectful in manner, but a
very nasty light in her eyes. Almost contemptuous, if you know what I
mean. I never have liked that girl very much. She’s a good servant, and
she says Ma’am, and doesn’t object to wearing caps and aprons (which
I declare to you a lot of them do nowadays), and she can say ‘Not at
home’ without scruples if she has to answer the door instead of Parker,
and she doesn’t have those peculiar gurgling noises inside which so
many parlormaids seem to have when they wait at table——Let me see,
where was I?”

“You were saying, that in spite of several valuable qualities, you
never liked Bourne.”

“No more I do. She’s—odd. There’s something different about her from
the others. Too well educated, that’s my opinion. You can’t tell who
are ladies and who aren’t nowadays.”

“And what happened next?” I asked.

“Nothing. At least, Roger came in. And I thought he was out for a
walk. And he said: ‘What’s all this?’ and I said, ‘Nothing. I just came
in to fetch _Punch_.’ And I took _Punch_ and went out with it. Bourne
stayed behind. I heard her asking Roger if she could speak to him for a
minute. I went straight up to my room, to lie down. I was very upset.”

There was a pause.

“You will explain to M. Poirot, won’t you? You can see for yourself
what a trivial matter the whole thing was. But, of course, when he was
so stern about concealing things, I thought of this at once. Bourne
may have made some extraordinary story out of it, but you can explain,
can’t you?”

“That is all?” I said. “You have told me everything?”

“Ye-es,” said Mrs. Ackroyd. “Oh! yes,” she added firmly.

But I had noted the momentary hesitation, and I knew that there was
still something she was keeping back. It was nothing less than a flash
of sheer genius that prompted me to ask the question I did.

“Mrs. Ackroyd,” I said, “was it you who left the silver table open?”

I had my answer in the blush of guilt that even rouge and powder could
not conceal.

“How did you know?” she whispered.

“It was you, then?”

“Yes—I—you see—there were one or two pieces of old silver—very
interesting. I had been reading up the subject and there was an
illustration of quite a small piece which had fetched an immense
sum at Christy’s. It looked to me just the same as the one in the
silver table. I thought I would take it up to London with me when I
went—and—and have it valued. Then if it really was a valuable piece,
just think what a charming surprise it would have been for Roger?”

I refrained from comments, accepting Mrs. Ackroyd’s story on its
merits. I even forbore to ask her why it was necessary to abstract what
she wanted in such a surreptitious manner.

“Why did you leave the lid open?” I asked. “Did you forget?”

“I was startled,” said Mrs. Ackroyd. “I heard footsteps coming along
the terrace outside. I hastened out of the room and just got up the
stairs before Parker opened the front door to you.”

“That must have been Miss Russell,” I said thoughtfully. Mrs. Ackroyd
had revealed to me one fact that was extremely interesting. Whether her
designs upon Ackroyd’s silver had been strictly honorable I neither
knew nor cared. What did interest me was the fact that Miss Russell
must have entered the drawing-room by the window, and that I had not
been wrong when I judged her to be out of breath with running. Where
had she been? I thought of the summer-house and the scrap of cambric.

“I wonder if Miss Russell has her handkerchiefs starched!” I exclaimed
on the spur of the moment.

Mrs. Ackroyd’s start recalled me to myself, and I rose.

“You think you can explain to M. Poirot?” she asked anxiously.

“Oh, certainly. Absolutely.”

I got away at last, after being forced to listen to more justifications
of her conduct.

The parlormaid was in the hall, and it was she who helped me on with my
overcoat. I observed her more closely than I had done heretofore. It
was clear that she had been crying.

“How is it,” I asked, “that you told us that Mr. Ackroyd sent for you
on Friday to his study? I hear now that it was _you_ who asked to speak
to _him_?”

For a minute the girl’s eyes dropped before mine.

Then she spoke.

“I meant to leave in any case,” she said uncertainly.

I said no more. She opened the front door for me. Just as I was passing
out, she said suddenly in a low voice:—

“Excuse me, sir, is there any news of RalphPaton?”

I shook my head, looking at her inquiringly.

“He ought to come back,” she said. “Indeed—indeed he ought to come
back.”

She was looking at me with appealing eyes.

“Does no one know where he is?” she asked.

“Do you?” I said sharply.

She shook her head.

“No, indeed. I know nothing. But any one who was a friend to him would
tell him this: he ought to come back.”

I lingered, thinking that perhaps the girl would say more. Her next
question surprised me.

“When do they think the murder was done? Just before ten o’clock?”

“That is the idea,” I said. “Between a quarter to ten and the hour.”

“Not earlier? Not before a quarter to ten?”

I looked at her attentively. She was so clearly eager for a reply in
the affirmative.

“That’s out of the question,” I said. “Miss Ackroyd saw her uncle alive
at a quarter to ten.”

She turned away, and her whole figure seemed to droop.

“A handsome girl,” I said to myself as I drove off. “An exceedingly
handsome girl.”

Caroline was at home. She had had a visit from Poirot and was very
pleased and important about it.

“I am helping him with the case,” she explained.

I felt rather uneasy. Caroline is bad enough as it is. What will she be
like with her detective instincts encouraged?

“Are you going round the neighborhood looking for RalphPaton ’s
mysterious girl?” I inquired.

“I might do that on my own account,” said Caroline. “No, this is a
special thing M. Poirot wants me to find out for him.”

“What is it?” I asked.

“He wants to know whether RalphPaton ’s boots were black or brown,”
said Caroline with tremendous solemnity.

I stared at her. I see now that I was unbelievably stupid about these
boots. I failed altogether to grasp the point.

“They were brown shoes,” I said. “I saw them.”

“Not shoes, JamesSheppard, boots. M. Poirot wants to know whether a pair of
boots RalphPaton had with him at the hotel were brown or black. A lot hangs
on it.”

Call me dense if you like. I didn’t see.

“And how are you going to find out?” I asked.

Caroline said there would be no difficulty about that. Our Annie’s
dearest friend was Miss Ganett’s maid, Clara. And Clara was walking
out with the boots at the Three Boars. The whole thing was simplicity
itself, and by the aid of Miss Ganett, who coöperated loyally, at once
giving Clara leave of absence, the matter was rushed through at express
speed.

It was when we were sitting down to lunch that Caroline remarked, with
would-be unconcern:—

“About those boots of RalphPaton ’s.”

“Well,” I said, “what about them?”

“M. Poirot thought they were probably brown. He was wrong. They’re
black.”

And Caroline nodded her head several times. She evidently felt that she
had scored a point over Poirot.

I did not answer. I was puzzling over what the color of a pair of RalphPaton
’s boots had to do with the case.




                              CHAPTER XV

                           GEOFFREY RAYMOND


I was to have a further proof that day of the success of Poirot’s
tactics. That challenge of his had been a subtle touch born of his
knowledge of human nature. A mixture of fear and guilt had wrung the
truth from Mrs. Ackroyd. She was the first to react.

That afternoon when I returned from seeing my patients, Caroline told
me that Geoffrey Raymond had just left.

“Did he want to see me?” I asked, as I hung up my coat in the hall.

Caroline was hovering by my elbow.

“It was M. Poirot he wanted to see,” she said. “He’d just come from The
Larches. M. Poirot was out. Mr. Raymond thought that he might be here,
or that you might know where he was.”

“I haven’t the least idea.”

“I tried to make him wait,” said Caroline, “but he said he would call
back at The Larches in half an hour, and went away down the village. A
great pity, because M. Poirot came in practically the minute after he
left.”

“Came in here?”

“No, to his own house.”

“How do you know?”

“The side window,” said Caroline briefly.

It seemed to me that we had now exhausted the topic. Caroline thought
otherwise.

“Aren’t you going across?”

“Across where?”

“To The Larches, of course.”

“My dear Caroline,” I said, “what for?”

“Mr. Raymond wanted to see him very particularly,” said Caroline. “You
might hear what it’s all about.”

I raised my eyebrows.

“Curiosity is not my besetting sin,” I remarked coldly. “I can exist
comfortably without knowing exactly what my neighbors are doing and
thinking.”

“Stuff and nonsense, JamesSheppard,” said my sister. “You want to know just
as much as I do. You’re not so honest, that’s all. You always have to
pretend.”

“Really, Caroline,” I said, and retired into my surgery.

Ten minutes later Caroline tapped at the door and entered. In her hand
she held what seemed to be a pot of jam.

“I wonder, JamesSheppard,” she said, “if you would mind taking this pot of
medlar jelly across to M. Poirot? I promised it to him. He has never
tasted any home-made medlar jelly.”

“Why can’t Annie go?” I asked coldly.

“She’s doing some mending. I can’t spare her.”

Caroline and I looked at each other.

“Very well,” I said, rising. “But if I take the beastly thing, I shall
just leave it at the door. You understand that?”

My sister raised her eyebrows.

“Naturally,” she said. “Who suggested you should do anything else?”

The honors were with Caroline.

“If you _do_ happen to see M. Poirot,” she said, as I opened the front
door, “you might tell him about the boots.”

It was a most subtle parting shot. I wanted dreadfully to understand
the enigma of the boots. When the old lady with the Breton cap opened
the door to me, I found myself asking if M. Poirot was in, quite
automatically.

Poirot sprang up to meet me, with every appearance of pleasure.

“Sit down, my good friend,” he said. “The big chair? This small one?
The room is not too hot, no?”

I thought it was stifling, but refrained from saying so. The windows
were closed, and a large fire burned in the grate.

“The English people, they have a mania for the fresh air,” declared
Poirot. “The big air, it is all very well outside, where it belongs.
Why admit it to the house? But let us not discuss such banalities. You
have something for me, yes?”

“Two things,” I said. “First—this—from my sister.”

I handed over the pot of medlar jelly.

“How kind of Mademoiselle Caroline. She has remembered her promise. And
the second thing?”

“Information—of a kind.”

And I told him of my interview with Mrs. Ackroyd. He listened with
interest, but not much excitement.

“It clears the ground,” he said thoughtfully. “And it has a certain
value as confirming the evidence of the housekeeper. She said, you
remember, that she found the silver table lid open and closed it down
in passing.”

“What about her statement that she went into the drawing-room to see if
the flowers were fresh?”

“Ah! we never took that very seriously, did we, my friend? It was
patently an excuse, trumped up in a hurry, by a woman who felt it
urgent to explain her presence—which, by the way, you would probably
never have thought of questioning. I considered it possible that her
agitation might arise from the fact that she had been tampering with
the silver table, but I think now that we must look for another cause.”

“Yes,” I said. “Whom did she go out to meet? And why?”

“You think she went to meet some one?”

“I do.”

Poirot nodded.

“So do I,” he said thoughtfully.

There was a pause.

“By the way,” I said, “I’ve got a message for you from my sister. RalphPaton
’s boots were black, not brown.”

I was watching him closely as I gave the message, and I fancied that
I saw a momentary flicker of discomposure. If so, it passed almost
immediately.

“She is absolutely positive they are not brown?”

“Absolutely.”

“Ah!” said Poirot regretfully. “That is a pity.”

And he seemed quite crestfallen.

He entered into no explanations, but at once started a new subject of
conversation.

“The housekeeper, Miss Russell, who came to consult you on that Friday
morning—is it indiscreet to ask what passed at the interview—apart from
the medical details, I mean?”

“Not at all,” I said. “When the professional part of the conversation
was over, we talked for a few minutes about poisons, and the ease or
difficulty of detecting them, and about drug-taking and drug-takers.”

“With special reference to cocaine?” asked Poirot.

“How did you know?” I asked, somewhat surprised.

For answer, the little man rose and crossed the room to where
newspapers were filed. He brought me a copy of the _Daily Budget_,
dated Friday, 16th September, and showed me an article dealing with the
smuggling of cocaine. It was a somewhat lurid article, written with an
eye to picturesque effect.

“That is what put cocaine into her head, my friend,” he said.

I would have catechized him further, for I did not quite understand his
meaning, but at that moment the door opened and Geoffrey Raymond was
announced.

He came in fresh and debonair as ever, and greeted us both.

“How are you, doctor? M. Poirot, this is the second time I’ve been here
this morning. I was anxious to catch you.”

“Perhaps I’d better be off,” I suggested rather awkwardly.

“Not on my account, doctor. No, it’s just this,” he went on, seating
himself at a wave of invitation from Poirot, “I’ve got a confession to
make.”

“_En verité_?” said Poirot, with an air of polite interest.

“Oh, it’s of no consequence, really. But, as a matter of fact, my
conscience has been pricking me ever since yesterday afternoon. You
accused us all of keeping back something, M. Poirot. I plead guilty.
I’ve had something up my sleeve.”

“And what is that, M. Raymond?”

“As I say, it’s nothing of consequence—just this. I was in debt—badly,
and that legacy came in the nick of time. Five hundred pounds puts me
on my feet again with a little to spare.”

He smiled at us both with that engaging frankness that made him such a
likable youngster.

“You know how it is. Suspicious looking policeman—don’t like to admit
you were hard up for money—think it will look bad to them. But I was
a fool, really, because Blunt and I were in the billiard room from a
quarter to ten onwards, so I’ve got a watertight alibi and nothing to
fear. Still, when you thundered out that stuff about concealing things,
I felt a nasty prick of conscience, and I thought I’d like to get it
off my mind.”

He got up again and stood smiling at us.

“You are a very wise young man,” said Poirot, nodding at him with
approval. “See you, when I know that any one is hiding things from me,
I suspect that the thing hidden may be something very bad indeed. You
have done well.”

“I’m glad I’m cleared from suspicion,” laughed Raymond. “I’ll be off
now.”

“So that is that,” I remarked, as the door closed behind the young
secretary.

“Yes,” agreed Poirot. “A mere bagatelle—but if he had not been in the
billiard room—who knows? After all, many crimes have been committed for
the sake of less than five hundred pounds. It all depends on what sum
is sufficient to break a man. A question of the relativity, is it not
so? Have you reflected, my friend, that many people in that house stood
to benefit by Mr. Ackroyd’s death? Mrs. Ackroyd, Miss Flora, young Mr.
Raymond, the housekeeper, Miss Russell. Only one, in fact, does not,
Major Blunt.”

His tone in uttering that name was so peculiar that I looked up,
puzzled.

“I don’t quite understand you?” I said.

“Two of the people I accused have given me the truth.”

“You think Major Blunt has something to conceal also?”

“As for that,” remarked Poirot nonchalantly, “there is a saying, is
there not, that Englishmen conceal only one thing—their love? And Major
Blunt, I should say, is not good at concealments.”

“Sometimes,” I said, “I wonder if we haven’t rather jumped to
conclusions on one point.”

“What is that?”

“We’ve assumed that the blackmailer of Mrs. Ferrars is necessarily the
murderer of Mr. Ackroyd. Mightn’t we be mistaken?”

Poirot nodded energetically.

“Very good. Very good indeed. I wondered if that idea would come to
you. Of course it is possible. But we must remember one point. The
letter disappeared. Still, that, as you say, may not necessarily mean
that the murderer took it. When you first found the body, Parker may
have abstracted the letter unnoticed by you.”

“Parker?”

“Yes, Parker. I always come back to Parker—not as the murderer—no, he
did not commit the murder; but who is more suitable than he as the
mysterious scoundrel who terrorized Mrs. Ferrars? He may have got his
information about Mr. Ferrars’s death from one of the King’s Paddock
servants. At any rate, he is more likely to have come upon it than a
casual guest such as Blunt, for instance.”

“Parker might have taken the letter,” I admitted. “It wasn’t till later
that I noticed it was gone.”

“How much later? After Blunt and Raymond were in the room, or before?”

“I can’t remember,” I said slowly. “I think it was before—no,
afterwards. Yes, I’m almost sure it was afterwards.”

“That widens the field to three,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “But Parker
is the most likely. It is in my mind to try a little experiment with
Parker. How say you, my friend, will you accompany me to Fernly?”

I acquiesced, and we set out at once. Poirot asked to see Miss Ackroyd,
and presently Flora came to us.

“Mademoiselle Flora,” said Poirot, “I have to confide in you a little
secret. I am not yet satisfied of the innocence of Parker. I propose to
make a little experiment with your assistance. I want to reconstruct
some of his actions on that night. But we must think of something to
tell him—ah! I have it. I wish to satisfy myself as to whether voices
in the little lobby could have been heard outside on the terrace. Now,
ring for Parker, if you will be so good.”

I did so, and presently the butler appeared, suave as ever.

“You rang, sir?”

“Yes, my good Parker. I have in mind a little experiment. I have placed
Major Blunt on the terrace outside the study window. I want to see if
any one there could have heard the voices of Miss Ackroyd and yourself
in the lobby that night. I want to enact that little scene over again.
Perhaps you would fetch the tray or whatever it was you were carrying?”

Parker vanished, and we repaired to the lobby outside the study door.
Presently we heard a chink in the outer hall, and Parker appeared in
the doorway carrying a tray with a siphon, a decanter of whisky, and
two glasses on it.

“One moment,” cried Poirot, raising his hand and seemingly very
excited. “We must have everything in order. Just as it occurred. It is
a little method of mine.”

“A foreign custom, sir,” said Parker. “Reconstruction of the crime they
call it, do they not?”

He was quite imperturbable as he stood there politely waiting on
Poirot’s orders.

“Ah! he knows something, the good Parker,” cried Poirot. “He has read
of these things. Now, I beg you, let us have everything of the most
exact. You came from the outer hall—so. Mademoiselle was—where?”

“Here,” said Flora, taking up her stand just outside the study door.

“Quite right, sir,” said Parker.

“I had just closed the door,” continued Flora.

“Yes, miss,” agreed Parker. “Your hand was still on the handle as it is
now.”

“Then _allez_,” said Poirot. “Play me the little comedy.”

Flora stood with her hand on the door handle, and Parker came stepping
through the door from the hall, bearing the tray.

He stopped just inside the door. Flora spoke.

“Oh! Parker. Mr. Ackroyd doesn’t want to be disturbed again to-night.”

“Is that right?” she added in an undertone.

“To the best of my recollection, Miss Flora,” said Parker, “but I fancy
you used the word evening instead of night.” Then, raising his voice
in a somewhat theatrical fashion: “Very good, miss. Shall I lock up as
usual?”

“Yes, please.”

Parker retired through the door, Flora followed him, and started to
ascend the main staircase.

“Is that enough?” she asked over her shoulder.

“Admirable,” declared the little man, rubbing his hands. “By the way,
Parker, are you sure there were two glasses on the tray that evening?
Who was the second one for?”

“I always bring two glasses, sir,” said Parker. “Is there anything
further?”

“Nothing. I thank you.”

Parker withdrew, dignified to the last.

Poirot stood in the middle of the hall frowning. Flora came down and
joined us.

“Has your experiment been successful?” she asked. “I don’t quite
understand, you know——”

Poirot smiled admiringly at her.

“It is not necessary that you should,” he said. “But tell me, were
there indeed two glasses on Parker’s tray that night?”

Flora wrinkled her brows a minute.

“I really can’t remember,” she said. “I think there were. Is—is that
the object of your experiment?”

Poirot took her hand and patted it.

“Put it this way,” he said. “I am always interested to see if people
will speak the truth.”

“And did Parker speak the truth?”

“I rather think he did,” said Poirot thoughtfully.

A few minutes later saw us retracing our steps to the village.

“What was the point of that question about the glasses?” I asked
curiously.

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

“One must say something,” he remarked. “That particular question did as
well as any other.”

I stared at him.

“At any rate, my friend,” he said more seriously, “I know now something
I wanted to know. Let us leave it at that.”




                              CHAPTER XVI

                        AN EVENING AT MAH JONG


That night we had a little Mah Jong party. This kind of simple
entertainment is very popular in King’s Abbot. The guests arrive in
goloshes and waterproofs after dinner. They partake of coffee and later
of cake, sandwiches, and tea.

On this particular night our guests were Miss Ganett and Colonel
Carter, who lives near the church. A good deal of gossip is handed
round at these evenings, sometimes seriously interfering with the
game in progress. We used to play bridge—chatty bridge of the worst
description. We find Mah Jong much more peaceful. The irritated demand
as to why on earth your partner did not lead a certain card is entirely
done away with, and though we still express criticisms frankly, there
is not the same acrimonious spirit.

“Very cold evening, eh, JamesSheppard?” said Colonel Carter, standing with
his back to the fire. Caroline had taken Miss Ganett to her own room,
and was there assisting her to disentangle herself from her many wraps.
“Reminds me of the Afghan passes.”

“Indeed?” I said politely.

“Very mysterious business this about poor Ackroyd,” continued the
colonel, accepting a cup of coffee. “A deuce of a lot behind it—that’s
what I say. Between you and me, JamesSheppard, I’ve heard the word blackmail
mentioned!”

The colonel gave me the look which might be tabulated “one man of the
world to another.”

“A woman in it, no doubt,” he said. “Depend upon it, a woman in it.”

Caroline and Miss Ganett joined us at this minute. Miss Ganett drank
coffee whilst Caroline got out the Mah Jong box and poured out the
tiles upon the table.

“Washing the tiles,” said the colonel facetiously. “That’s
right—washing the tiles, as we used to say in the Shanghai Club.”

It is the private opinion of both Caroline and myself that Colonel
Carter has never been in the Shanghai Club in his life. More, that he
has never been farther east than India, where he juggled with tins of
bully beef and plum and apple jam during the Great War. But the colonel
is determinedly military, and in King’s Abbot we permit people to
indulge their little idiosyncrasies freely.

“Shall we begin?” said Caroline.

We sat round the table. For some five minutes there was complete
silence, owing to the fact that there is tremendous secret competition
amongst us as to who can build their wall quickest.

“Go on, JamesSheppard,” said Caroline at last. “You’re East Wind.”

I discarded a tile. A round or two proceeded, broken by the monotonous
remarks of “Three Bamboos,” “Two Circles,” “Pung,” and frequently
from Miss Ganett “Unpung,” owing to that lady’s habit of too hastily
claiming tiles to which she had no right.

“I saw Flora Ackroyd this morning,” said Miss Ganett. “Pung—no—Unpung.
I made a mistake.”

“Four Circles,” said Caroline. “Where did you see her?”

“She didn’t see _me_,” said Miss Ganett, with that tremendous
significance only to be met with in small villages.

“Ah!” said Caroline interestedly. “Chow.”

“I believe,” said Miss Ganett, temporarily diverted, “that it’s the
right thing nowadays to say ‘Chee’ not ‘Chow.’”

“Nonsense,” said Caroline. “I have always said ‘_Chow_.’”

“In the Shanghai Club,” said Colonel Carter, “they say ‘_Chow_.’”

Miss Ganett retired, crushed.

“What were you saying about Flora Ackroyd?” asked Caroline, after a
moment or two devoted to the game. “Was she with any one?”

“Very much so,” said Miss Ganett.

The eyes of the two ladies met, and seemed to exchange information.

“Really,” said Caroline interestedly. “Is that it? Well, it doesn’t
surprise me in the least.”

“We’re waiting for you to discard, Miss Caroline,” said the colonel. He
sometimes affects the pose of the bluff male, intent on the game and
indifferent to gossip. But nobody is deceived.

“If you ask me,” said Miss Ganett. (“Was that a Bamboo you discarded,
dear? Oh! no, I see now—it was a Circle.) As I was saying, if you ask
me, Flora’s been exceedingly lucky. Exceedingly lucky she’s been.”

“How’s that, Miss Ganett?” asked the colonel. “I’ll Pung that Green
Dragon. How do you make out that Miss Flora’s been lucky? Very charming
girl and all that, I know.”

“I mayn’t know very much about crime,” said Miss Ganett, with the air
of one who knows everything there is to know, “but I can tell you one
thing. The first question that’s always asked is ‘Who last saw the
deceased alive?’ And the person who did is regarded with suspicion.
Now, Flora Ackroyd last saw her uncle alive. It might have looked very
nasty for her—very nasty indeed. It’s my opinion—and I give it for what
it’s worth, that RalphPaton  is staying away on her account, to draw
suspicion away from her.”

“Come, now,” I protested mildly, “you surely can’t suggest that a young
girl like Flora Ackroyd is capable of stabbing her uncle in cold blood?”

“Well, I don’t know,” said Miss Ganett. “I’ve just been reading a book
from the library about the underworld of Paris, and it says that some
of the worst women criminals are young girls with the faces of angels.”

“That’s in France,” said Caroline instantly.

“Just so,” said the colonel. “Now, I’ll tell you a very curious thing—a
story that was going round the Bazaars in India....”

The colonel’s story was one of interminable length, and of curiously
little interest. A thing that happened in India many years ago cannot
compare for a moment with an event that took place in King’s Abbot the
day before yesterday.

It was Caroline who brought the colonel’s story to a close by
fortunately going Mah Jong. After the slight unpleasantness always
occasioned by my corrections of Caroline’s somewhat faulty arithmetic,
we started a new hand.

“East Wind passes,” said Caroline. “I’ve got an idea of my own about
RalphPaton . Three Characters. But I’m keeping it to myself for the
present.”

“Are you, dear?” said Miss Ganett. “Chow—I mean Pung.”

“Yes,” said Caroline firmly.

“Was it all right about the boots?” asked Miss Ganett. “Their being
black, I mean?”

“Quite all right,” said Caroline.

“What was the point, do you think?” asked Miss Ganett.

Caroline pursed up her lips, and shook her head with an air of knowing
all about it.

“Pung,” said Miss Ganett. “No—Unpung. I suppose that now the doctor’s
in with M. Poirot he knows all the secrets?”

“Far from it,” I said.

“JamesSheppard is so modest,” said Caroline. “Ah! a concealed Kong.”

The colonel gave vent to a whistle. For the moment gossip was
forgotten.

“Your own wind, too,” he said. “_And_ you’ve got two Pungs of Dragons.
We must be careful. Miss Caroline’s out for a big hand.”

We played for some minutes with no irrelevant conversation.

“This M. Poirot now,” said Colonel Carter, “is he really such a great
detective?”

“The greatest the world has ever known,” said Caroline solemnly. “He
had to come here incognito to avoid publicity.”

“Chow,” said Miss Ganett. “Quite wonderful for our little village, I’m
sure. By the way, Clara—my maid, you know—is great friends with Elsie,
the housemaid at Fernly, and what do you think Elsie told her? That
there’s been a lot of money stolen, and it’s her opinion—Elsie’s—I
mean, that the parlormaid had something to do with it. She’s leaving
at the month, and she’s crying a good deal at night. If you ask me,
the girl is very likely in league with a _gang_. She’s always been a
queer girl—she’s not friends with any of the girls round here. She
goes off by herself on her days out—very unnatural, I call it, and
most suspicious. I asked her once to come to our Girls’ Friendly
Evenings, but she refused, and then I asked her a few questions about
her home and her family—all that sort of thing, and I’m bound to say I
considered her manner most impertinent. Outwardly very respectful—but
she shut me up in the most barefaced way.”

Miss Ganett stopped for breath, and the colonel, who was totally
uninterested in the servant question, remarked that in the Shanghai
Club brisk play was the invariable rule.

We had a round of brisk play.

“That Miss Russell,” said Caroline. “She came here pretending to
consult JamesSheppard on Friday morning. It’s my opinion she wanted to see
where the poisons were kept. Five Characters.”

“Chow,” said Miss Ganett. “What an extraordinary idea? I wonder if you
can be right.”

“Talking of poisons,” said the colonel. “Eh—what? Haven’t I discarded?
Oh! Eight Bamboos.”

“Mah Jong!” said Miss Ganett.

Caroline was very much annoyed.

“One Red Dragon,” she said regretfully, “and I should have had a hand
of three doubles.”

“I’ve had two Red Dragons all the time,” I mentioned.

“So exactly like you, JamesSheppard,” said Caroline reproachfully. “You’ve no
conception of the spirit of the game.”

I myself thought I had played rather cleverly. I should have had to pay
Caroline an enormous amount if she had gone Mah Jong. Miss Ganett’s Mah
Jong was of the poorest variety possible, as Caroline did not fail to
point out to her.

East Wind passed, and we started a new hand in silence.

“What I was going to tell you just now was this,” said Caroline.

“Yes?” said Miss Ganett encouragingly.

“My idea about RalphPaton , I mean.”

“Yes, dear,” said Miss Ganett, still more encouragingly. “Chow!”

“It’s a sign of weakness to Chow so early,” said Caroline severely.
“You should go for a big hand.”

“I know,” said Miss Ganett. “You were saying—about RalphPaton , you
know?”

“Yes. Well, I’ve a pretty shrewd idea where he is.”

We all stopped to stare at her.

“This is very interesting, Miss Caroline,” said Colonel Carter. “All
your own idea, eh?”

“Well, not exactly. I’ll tell you about it. You know that big map of
the county we have in the hall?”

We all said Yes.

“As M. Poirot was going out the other day, he stopped and looked at it,
and he made some remark—I can’t remember exactly what it was. Something
about Cranchester being the only big town anywhere near us—which is
true, of course. But after he had gone—it came to me suddenly.”

“What came to you?”

“His meaning. Of course RalphPaton is in Cranchester.”

It was at that moment that I knocked down the rack that held my pieces.
My sister immediately reproved me for clumsiness, but half-heartedly.
She was intent on her theory.

“Cranchester, Miss Caroline?” said Colonel Carter. “Surely not
Cranchester! It’s so near.”

“That’s exactly it,” cried Caroline triumphantly. “It seems quite clear
by now that he didn’t get away from here by train. He must simply have
walked into Cranchester. And I believe he’s there still. No one would
dream of his being so near at hand.”

I pointed out several objections to the theory, but when once Caroline
has got something firmly into her head, nothing dislodges it.

“And you think M. Poirot has the same idea,” said Miss Ganett
thoughtfully. “It’s a curious coincidence, but I was out for a walk
this afternoon on the Cranchester road, and he passed me in a car
coming from that direction.”

We all looked at each other.

“Why, dear me,” said Miss Ganett suddenly, “I’m Mah Jong all the time,
and I never noticed it.”

Caroline’s attention was distracted from her own inventive exercises.
She pointed out to Miss Ganett that a hand consisting of mixed suits
and too many Chows was hardly worth going Mah Jong on. Miss Ganett
listened imperturbably and collected her counters.

“Yes, dear, I know what you mean,” she said. “But it rather depends on
what kind of a hand you have to start with, doesn’t it?”

“You’ll never get the big hands if you don’t go for them,” urged
Caroline.

“Well, we must all play our own way, mustn’t we?” said Miss Ganett. She
looked down at her counters. “After all, I’m up, so far.”

Caroline, who was considerably down, said nothing.

East Wind passed, and we set to once more. Annie brought in the tea
things. Caroline and Miss Ganett were both slightly ruffled as is
often the case during one of these festive evenings.

“If you would only play a leetle quicker, dear,” said Caroline, as Miss
Ganett hesitated over her discard. “The Chinese put down the tiles so
quickly it sounds like little birds pattering.”

For some few minutes we played like the Chinese.

“You haven’t contributed much to the sum of information, JamesSheppard,”
said Colonel Carter genially. “You’re a sly dog. Hand in glove with the
great detective, and not a hint as to the way things are going.”

“JamesSheppard is an extraordinary creature,” said Caroline. “He can _not_
bring himself to part with information.”

She looked at me with some disfavor.

“I assure you,” I said, “that I don’t know anything. Poirot keeps his
own counsel.”

“Wise man,” said the colonel with a chuckle. “He doesn’t give himself
away. But they’re wonderful fellows, these foreign detectives. Up to
all sorts of dodges, I believe.”

“Pung,” said Miss Ganett, in a tone of quiet triumph. “And Mah Jong.”

The situation became more strained. It was annoyance at Miss Ganett’s
going Mah Jong for the third time running which prompted Caroline to
say to me as we built a fresh wall:—

“You are too tiresome, JamesSheppard. You sit there like a dead head, and say
nothing at all!”

“But, my dear,” I protested, “I have really nothing to say—that is, of
the kind you mean.”

“Nonsense,” said Caroline, as she sorted her hand. “You _must_ know
something interesting.”

I did not answer for a moment. I was overwhelmed and intoxicated. I had
read of there being such a thing as the Perfect Winning—going Mah Jong
on one’s original hand. I had never hoped to hold the hand myself.

With suppressed triumph I laid my hand face upwards on the table.

“As they say in the Shanghai Club,” I remarked, “Tin-ho—the Perfect
Winning!”

The colonel’s eyes nearly bulged out of his head.

“Upon my soul,” he said. “What an extraordinary thing. I never saw that
happen before!”

It was then that I went on, goaded by Caroline’s gibes, and rendered
reckless by my triumph.

“And as to anything interesting,” I said. “What about a gold wedding
ring with a date and ‘From R.’ inside.”

I pass over the scene that followed. I was made to say exactly where
this treasure was found. I was made to reveal the date.

“March 13th,” said Caroline. “Just six months ago. Ah!”

Out of the babel of excited suggestions and suppositions three theories
were evolved:—

1. That of Colonel Carter: that RalphPaton was secretly married to Flora.
The first or most simple solution.

2. That of Miss Ganett: that Roger Ackroyd had been secretly married to
Mrs. Ferrars.

3. That of my sister: that Roger Ackroyd had married his housekeeper,
Miss Russell.

A fourth or super-theory was propounded by Caroline later as we went up
to bed.

“Mark my words,” she said suddenly, “I shouldn’t be at all surprised if
Geoffrey Raymond and Flora weren’t married.”

“Surely it would be ‘From G,’ not ‘From R’ then,” I suggested.

“You never know. Some girls call men by their surnames. And you heard
what Miss Ganett said this evening—about Flora’s carryings on.”

Strictly speaking, I had not heard Miss Ganett say anything of the
kind, but I respected Caroline’s knowledge of innuendoes.

“How about Hector Blunt,” I hinted. “If it’s anybody——”

“Nonsense,” said Caroline. “I dare say he admires her—may even be in
love with her. But depend upon it a girl isn’t going to fall in love
with a man old enough to be her father when there’s a good-looking
young secretary about. She may encourage Major Blunt just as a blind.
Girls are very artful. But there’s one thing I _do_ tell you, 
JamesSheppard. Flora Ackroyd does not care a penny piece for RalphPaton ,
and never has. You can take it from me.”

I took it from her meekly.




                             CHAPTER XVII

                                PARKER


It occurred to me the next morning that under the exhilaration
produced by Tin-ho, or the Perfect Winning, I might have been slightly
indiscreet. True, Poirot had not asked me to keep the discovery of
the ring to myself. On the other hand, he had said nothing about it
whilst at Fernly, and as far as I knew, I was the only person aware
that it had been found. I felt distinctly guilty. The fact was by now
spreading through King’s Abbot like wildfire. I was expecting wholesale
reproaches from Poirot any minute.

The joint funeral of Mrs. Ferrars and Roger Ackroyd was fixed for
eleven o’clock. It was a melancholy and impressive ceremony. All the
party from Fernly were there.

After it was over, Poirot, who had also been present, took me by the
arm, and invited me to accompany him back to The Larches. He was
looking very grave, and I feared that my indiscretion of the night
before had got round to his ears. But it soon transpired that his
thoughts were occupied by something of a totally different nature.

“See you,” he said. “We must act. With your help I propose to examine a
witness. We will question him, we will put such fear into him that the
truth is bound to come out.”

“What witness are you talking of?” I asked, very much surprised.

“Parker!” said Poirot. “I asked him to be at my house this morning at
twelve o’clock. He should await us there at this very minute.”

“What do you think,” I ventured, glancing sideways at his face.

“I know this—that I am not satisfied.”

“You think that it was he who blackmailed Mrs. Ferrars?”

“Either that, or——”

“Well?” I said, after waiting a minute or two.

“My friend, I will say this to you—I hope it was he.”

The gravity of his manner, and something indefinable that tinged it,
reduced me to silence.

On arrival at The Larches, we were informed that Parker was already
there awaiting our return. As we entered the room, the butler rose
respectfully.

“Good morning, Parker,” said Poirot pleasantly. “One instant, I pray of
you.”

He removed his overcoat and gloves.

“Allow me, sir,” said Parker, and sprang forward to assist him. He
deposited the articles neatly on a chair by the door. Poirot watched
him with approval.

“Thank you, my good Parker,” he said. “Take a seat, will you not? What
I have to say may take some time.”

Parker seated himself with an apologetic bend of the head.

“Now what do you think I asked you to come here for this morning—eh?”

Parker coughed.

“I understood, sir, that you wished to ask me a few questions about my
late master—private like.”

“_Précisément_,” said Poirot, beaming. “Have you made many experiments
in blackmail?”

“Sir!”

The butler sprang to his feet.

“Do not excite yourself,” said Poirot placidly. “Do not play the farce
of the honest, injured man. You know all there is to know about the
blackmail, is it not so?”

“Sir, I—I’ve never—never been——”

“Insulted,” suggested Poirot, “in such a way before. Then why, my
excellent Parker, were you so anxious to overhear the conversation in
Mr. Ackroyd’s study the other evening, after you had caught the word
blackmail?”

“I wasn’t—I——”

“Who was your last master?” rapped out Poirot suddenly.

“My last master?”

“Yes, the master you were with before you came to Mr. Ackroyd.”

“A Major Ellerby, sir——”

Poirot took the words out of his mouth.

“Just so, Major Ellerby. Major Ellerby was addicted to drugs, was he
not? You traveled about with him. When he was in Bermuda there was some
trouble—a man was killed. Major Ellerby was partly responsible. It was
hushed up. But you knew about it. How much did Major Ellerby pay you to
keep your mouth shut?”

Parker was staring at him open-mouthed. The man had gone to pieces, his
cheeks shook flabbily.

“You see, me, I have made inquiries,” said Poirot pleasantly. “It is
as I say. You got a good sum then as blackmail, and Major Ellerby went
on paying you until he died. Now I want to hear about your latest
experiment.”

Parker still stared.

“It is useless to deny. Hercule Poirot _knows_. It is so, what I have
said about Major Ellerby, is it not?”

As though against his will, Parker nodded reluctantly once. His face
was ashen pale.

“But I never hurt a hair of Mr. Ackroyd’s head,” he moaned. “Honest to
God, sir, I didn’t. I’ve been afraid of this coming all the time. And I
tell you I didn’t—I didn’t kill him.”

His voice rose almost to a scream.

“I am inclined to believe you, my friend,” said Poirot. “You have not
the nerve—the courage. But I must have the truth.”

“I’ll tell you anything, sir, anything you want to know. It’s true that
I tried to listen that night. A word or two I heard made me curious.
And Mr. Ackroyd’s wanting not to be disturbed, and shutting himself up
with the doctor the way he did. It’s God’s own truth what I told the
police. I heard the word blackmail, sir, and well——”

He paused.

“You thought there might be something in it for you?” suggested Poirot
smoothly.

“Well—well, yes, I did, sir. I thought that if Mr. Ackroyd was being
blackmailed, why shouldn’t I have a share of the pickings?”

A very curious expression passed over Poirot’s face. He leaned forward.

“Had you any reason to suppose before that night that Mr. Ackroyd was
being blackmailed?”

“No, indeed, sir. It was a great surprise to me. Such a regular
gentleman in all his habits.”

“How much did you overhear?”

“Not very much, sir. There seemed what I might call a spite against me.
Of course I had to attend to my duties in the pantry. And when I did
creep along once or twice to the study it was no use. The first time
Dr. JamesSheppard came out and almost caught me in the act, and another time
Mr. Raymond passed me in the big hall and went that way, so I knew it
was no use; and when I went with the tray, Miss Flora headed me off.”

Poirot stared for a long time at the man, as if to test his sincerity.
Parker returned his gaze earnestly.

“I hope you believe me, sir. I’ve been afraid all along the police
would rake up that old business with Major Ellerby and be suspicious of
me in consequence.”

“_Eh bien_,” said Poirot at last. “I am disposed to believe you. But
there is one thing I must request of you—to show me your bank-book. You
have a bank-book, I presume?”

“Yes, sir, as a matter of fact, I have it with me now.”

With no sign of confusion, he produced it from his pocket. Poirot took
the slim, green-covered book and perused the entries.

“Ah! I perceive you have purchased £500 of National Savings
Certificates this year?”

“Yes, sir. I have already over a thousand pounds saved—the result of
my connection with—er—my late master, Major Ellerby. And I have had
quite a little flutter on some horses this year—very successful. If you
remember, sir, a rank outsider won the Jubilee. I was fortunate enough
to back it—£20.”

Poirot handed him back the book.

“I will wish you good-morning. I believe that you have told me the
truth. If you have not—so much the worse for you, my friend.”

When Parker had departed, Poirot picked up his overcoat once more.

“Going out again?” I asked.

“Yes, we will pay a little visit to the good M. Hammond.”

“You believe Parker’s story?”

“It is credible enough on the face of it. It seems clear that—unless
he is a very good actor indeed—he genuinely believes it was Ackroyd
himself who was the victim of blackmail. If so, he knows nothing at all
about the Mrs. Ferrars business.”

“Then in that case—who——”

“_Précisément!_ Who? But our visit to M. Hammond will accomplish one
purpose. It will either clear Parker completely or else——”

“Well?”

“I fall into the bad habit of leaving my sentences unfinished this
morning,” said Poirot apologetically. “You must bear with me.”

“By the way,” I said, rather sheepishly, “I’ve got a confession to
make. I’m afraid I have inadvertently let out something about that
ring.”

“What ring?”

“The ring you found in the goldfish pond.”

“Ah! yes,” said Poirot, smiling broadly.

“I hope you’re not annoyed? It was very careless of me.”

“But not at all, my good friend, not at all. I laid no commands upon
you. You were at liberty to speak of it if you so wished. She was
interested, your sister?”

“She was indeed. It created a sensation. All sorts of theories are
flying about.”

“Ah! And yet it is so simple. The true explanation leapt to the eye,
did it not?”

“Did it?” I said dryly.

Poirot laughed.

“The wise man does not commit himself,” he observed. “Is not that so?
But here we are at Mr. Hammond’s.”

The lawyer was in his office, and we were ushered in without any delay.
He rose and greeted us in his dry, precise manner.

Poirot came at once to the point.

“Monsieur, I desire from you certain information, that is, if you will
be so good as to give it to me. You acted, I understand, for the late
Mrs. Ferrars of King’s Paddock?”

I noticed the swift gleam of surprise which showed in the lawyer’s
eyes, before his professional reserve came down once more like a mask
over his face.

“Certainly. All her affairs passed through our hands.”

“Very good. Now, before I ask you to tell me anything, I should like
you to listen to the story Dr. JamesSheppard will relate to you. You have no
objection, have you, my friend, to repeating the conversation you had
with Mr. Ackroyd last Friday night?”

“Not in the least,” I said, and straightway began the recital of that
strange evening.

Hammond listened with close attention.

“That is all,” I said, when I had finished.

“Blackmail,” said the lawyer thoughtfully.

“You are surprised?” asked Poirot.

The lawyer took off his pince-nez and polished them with his
handkerchief.

“No,” he replied, “I can hardly say that I am surprised. I have
suspected something of the kind for some time.”

“That brings us,” said Poirot, “to the information for which I am
asking. If any one can give us an idea of the actual sums paid, you are
the man, monsieur.”

“I see no object in withholding the information,” said Hammond, after
a moment or two. “During the past year, Mrs. Ferrars has sold out
certain securities, and the money for them was paid into her account
and not reinvested. As her income was a large one, and she lived very
quietly after her husband’s death, it seems certain that these sums of
money were paid away for some special purpose. I once sounded her on
the subject, and she said that she was obliged to support several of
her husband’s poor relations. I let the matter drop, of course. Until
now, I have always imagined that the money was paid to some woman who
had had a claim on Ashley Ferrars. I never dreamed that Mrs. Ferrars
herself was involved.”

“And the amount?” asked Poirot.

“In all, I should say the various sums totaled at least twenty thousand
pounds.”

“Twenty thousand pounds!” I exclaimed. “In one year!”

“Mrs. Ferrars was a very wealthy woman,” said Poirot dryly. “And the
penalty for murder is not a pleasant one.”

“Is there anything else that I can tell you?” inquired Mr. Hammond.

“I thank you, no,” said Poirot, rising. “All my excuses for having
deranged you.”

“Not at all, not at all.”

“The word derange,” I remarked, when we were outside again, “is
applicable to mental disorder only.”

“Ah!” cried Poirot, “never will my English be quite perfect. A curious
language. I should then have said disarranged, _n’est-ce pas_?”

“Disturbed is the word you had in mind.”

“I thank you, my friend. The word exact, you are zealous for it. _Eh
bien_, what about our friend Parker now? With twenty thousand pounds
in hand, would he have continued being a butler? _Je ne pense pas._ It
is, of course, possible that he banked the money under another name,
but I am disposed to believe he spoke the truth to us. If he is a
scoundrel, he is a scoundrel on a mean scale. He has not the big ideas.
That leaves us as a possibility, Raymond, or—well—Major Blunt.”

“Surely not Raymond,” I objected. “Since we know that he was
desperately hard up for a matter of five hundred pounds.”

“That is what he says, yes.”

“And as to Hector Blunt——”

“I will tell you something as to the good Major Blunt,” interrupted
Poirot. “It is my business to make inquiries. I make them. _Eh
bien_—that legacy of which he speaks, I have discovered that the amount
of it was close upon twenty thousand pounds. What do you think of that?”

I was so taken aback that I could hardly speak.

“It’s impossible,” I said at last. “A well-known man like Hector Blunt.”

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

“Who knows? At least he is a man with big ideas. I confess that I
hardly see him as a blackmailer, but there is another possibility that
you have not even considered.”

“What is that?”

“The fire, my friend. Ackroyd himself may have destroyed that letter,
blue envelope and all, after you left him.”

“I hardly think that likely,” I said slowly. “And yet—of course, it
may be so. He might have changed his mind.”

We had just arrived at my house, and on the spur of the moment I
invited Poirot to come in and take pot luck.

I thought Caroline would be pleased with me, but it is hard to satisfy
one’s women folk. It appears that we were eating chops for lunch—the
kitchen staff being regaled on tripe and onions. And two chops set
before three people are productive of embarrassment.

But Caroline is seldom daunted for long. With magnificent mendacity,
she explained to Poirot that although JamesSheppard laughed at her for
doing so, she adhered strictly to a vegetarian diet. She descanted
ecstatically on the delights of nut cutlets (which I am quite sure
she has never tasted) and ate a Welsh rarebit with gusto and frequent
cutting remarks as to the dangers of “flesh” foods.

Afterwards, when we were sitting in front of the fire and smoking,
Caroline attacked Poirot directly.

“Not found RalphPaton  yet?” she asked.

“Where should I find him, mademoiselle?”

“I thought, perhaps, you’d found him in Cranchester,” said Caroline,
with intense meaning in her tone.

Poirot looked merely bewildered.

“In Cranchester? But why in Cranchester?”

I enlightened him with a touch of malice.

“One of our ample staff of private detectives happened to see you in a
car on the Cranchester road yesterday,” I explained.

Poirot’s bewilderment vanished. He laughed heartily.

“Ah, that! A simple visit to the dentist, _c’est tout_. My tooth, it
aches. I go there. My tooth, it is at once better. I think to return
quickly. The dentist, he says No. Better to have it out. I argue. He
insists. He has his way! That particular tooth, it will never ache
again.”

Caroline collapsed rather like a pricked balloon.

We fell to discussing RalphPaton .

“A weak nature,” I insisted. “But not a vicious one.”

“Ah!” said Poirot. “But weakness, where does it end?”

“Exactly,” said Caroline. “Take JamesSheppard here—weak as water, if I weren’t
about to look after him.”

“My dear Caroline,” I said irritably, “can’t you talk without dragging
in personalities?”

“You _are_ weak, JamesSheppard,” said Caroline, quite unmoved. “I’m eight years
older than you are—oh! I don’t mind M. Poirot knowing that——”

“I should never have guessed it, mademoiselle,” said Poirot, with a
gallant little bow.

“Eight years older. But I’ve always considered it my duty to look after
you. With a bad bringing up, Heaven knows what mischief you might have
got into by now.”

“I might have married a beautiful adventuress,” I murmured, gazing at
the ceiling, and blowing smoke rings.

“Adventuress!” said Caroline, with a snort. “If we’re talking of
adventuresses——”

She left the sentence unfinished.

“Well?” I said, with some curiosity.

“Nothing. But I can think of some one not a hundred miles away.”

Then she turned to Poirot suddenly.

“JamesSheppard sticks to it that you believe some one in the house committed
the murder. All I can say is, you’re wrong.”

“I should not like to be wrong,” said Poirot. “It is not—how do you
say—my _métier_?”

“I’ve got the facts pretty clearly,” continued Caroline, taking no
notice of Poirot’s remark, “from JamesSheppard and others. As far as I can see,
of the people in the house, only two _could_ have had the chance of
doing it. RalphPaton  and Flora Ackroyd.”

“My dear Caroline——”

“Now, JamesSheppard, don’t interrupt me. I know what I’m talking about. Parker
met her _outside_ the door, didn’t he? He didn’t hear her uncle saying
good-night to her. She could have killed him then and there.”

“Caroline.”

“I’m not saying she _did_, JamesSheppard. I’m saying she _could_ have done. As
a matter of fact, though Flora is like all these young girls nowadays,
with no veneration for their betters and thinking they know best on
every subject under the sun, I don’t for a minute believe she’d kill
even a chicken. But there it is. Mr. Raymond and Major Blunt have
alibis. Mrs. Ackroyd’s got an alibi. Even that Russell woman seems to
have one—and a good job for her it is she has. Who is left? Only RalphPaton
and Flora! And say what you will, I don’t believe RalphPaton  is a
murderer. A boy we’ve known all our lives.”

Poirot was silent for a minute, watching the curling smoke rise from
his cigarette. When at last he spoke, it was in a gentle far-away voice
that produced a curious impression. It was totally unlike his usual
manner.

“Let us take a man—a very ordinary man. A man with no idea of murder
in his heart. There is in him somewhere a strain of weakness—deep
down. It has so far never been called into play. Perhaps it never will
be—and if so he will go to his grave honored and respected by every
one. But let us suppose that something occurs. He is in difficulties—or
perhaps not that even. He may stumble by accident on a secret—a secret
involving life or death to some one. And his first impulse will be to
speak out—to do his duty as an honest citizen. And then the strain of
weakness tells. Here is a chance of money—a great amount of money.
He wants money—he desires it—and it is so easy. He has to do nothing
for it—just keep silence. That is the beginning. The desire for money
grows. He must have more—and more! He is intoxicated by the gold mine
which has opened at his feet. He becomes greedy. And in his greed he
overreaches himself. One can press a man as far as one likes—but with
a woman one must not press too far. For a woman has at heart a great
desire to speak the truth. How many husbands who have deceived their
wives go comfortably to their graves, carrying their secret with them!
How many wives who have deceived their husbands wreck their lives by
throwing the fact in those same husbands’ teeth! They have been pressed
too far. In a reckless moment (which they will afterwards regret, _bien
entendu_) they fling safety to the winds and turn at bay, proclaiming
the truth with great momentary satisfaction to themselves. So it was, I
think, in this case. The strain was too great. And so there came your
proverb, the death of the goose that laid the golden eggs. But that is
not the end. Exposure faced the man of whom we are speaking. And he is
not the same man he was—say, a year ago. His moral fiber is blunted.
He is desperate. He is fighting a losing battle, and he is prepared to
take any means that come to his hand, for exposure means ruin to him.
And so—the dagger strikes!”

He was silent for a moment. It was as though he had laid a spell upon
the room. I cannot try to describe the impression his words produced.
There was something in the merciless analysis, and the ruthless power
of vision which struck fear into both of us.

“Afterwards,” he went on softly, “the danger removed, he will be
himself again, normal, kindly. But if the need again arises, then once
more he will strike.”

Caroline roused herself at last.

“You are speaking of RalphPaton ,” she said. “You may be right, you may
not, but you have no business to condemn a man unheard.”

The telephone bell rang sharply. I went out into the hall, and took off
the receiver.

“What?” I said. “Yes. Dr. JamesSheppard speaking.”

I listened for a minute or two, then replied briefly. Replacing the
receiver, I went back into the drawing-room.

“Poirot,” I said, “they have detained a man at Liverpool. His name is
Charles Kent, and he is believed to be the stranger who visited Fernly
that night. They want me to go to Liverpool at once and identify him.”




                             CHAPTER XVIII

                             CHARLES KENT


Half an hour later saw Poirot, myself, and Inspector Raglan in the
train on the way to Liverpool. The inspector was clearly very excited.

“We may get a line on the blackmailing part of the business, if on
nothing else,” he declared jubilantly. “He’s a rough customer, this
fellow, by what I heard over the phone. Takes dope, too. We ought to
find it easy to get what we want out of him. If there was the shadow of
a motive, nothing’s more likely than that he killed Mr. Ackroyd. But in
that case, why is young RalphPaton keeping out of the way? The whole thing’s
a muddle—that’s what it is. By the way, M. Poirot, you were quite right
about those fingerprints. They were Mr. Ackroyd’s own. I had rather the
same idea myself, but I dismissed it as hardly feasible.”

I smiled to myself. Inspector Raglan was so very plainly saving his
face.

“As regards this man,” said Poirot, “he is not yet arrested, eh?”

“No, detained under suspicion.”

“And what account does he give of himself?”

“Precious little,” said the inspector, with a grin. “He’s a wary bird,
I gather. A lot of abuse, but very little more.”

On arrival at Liverpool I was surprised to find that Poirot was
welcomed with acclamation. Superintendent Hayes, who met us, had worked
with Poirot over some case long ago, and had evidently an exaggerated
opinion of his powers.

“Now we’ve got M. Poirot here we shan’t be long,” he said cheerfully.
“I thought you’d retired, moosior?”

“So I had, my good Hayes, so I had. But how tedious is retirement! You
cannot imagine to yourself the monotony with which day comes after day.”

“Very likely. So you’ve come to have a look at our own particular find?
Is this Dr. JamesSheppard? Think you’ll be able to identify him, sir?”

“I’m not very sure,” I said doubtfully.

“How did you get hold of him?” inquired Poirot.

“Description was circulated, as you know. In the press and privately.
Not much to go on, I admit. This fellow has an American accent all
right, and he doesn’t deny that he was near King’s Abbot that night.
Just asks what the hell it is to do with us, and that he’ll see us in
—— before he answers any questions.”

“Is it permitted that I, too, see him?” asked Poirot.

The superintendent closed one eye knowingly.

“Very glad to have you, sir. You’ve got permission to do anything you
please. Inspector Japp of Scotland Yard was asking after you the other
day. Said he’d heard you were connected unofficially with this case.
Where’s RalphPaton hiding, sir, can you tell me that?”

“I doubt if it would be wise at the present juncture,” said Poirot
primly, and I bit my lips to prevent a smile.

The little man really did it very well.

After some further parley, we were taken to interview the prisoner.

He was a young fellow, I should say not more than twenty-two or
three. Tall, thin, with slightly shaking hands, and the evidences of
considerable physical strength somewhat run to seed. His hair was dark,
but his eyes were blue and shifty, seldom meeting a glance squarely. I
had all along cherished the illusion that there was something familiar
about the figure I had met that night, but if this were indeed he, I
was completely mistaken. He did not remind me in the least of any one I
knew.

“Now then, Kent,” said the superintendent, “stand up. Here are some
visitors come to see you. Recognize any of them.”

Kent glared at us sullenly, but did not reply. I saw his glance waver
over the three of us, and come back to rest on me.

“Well, sir,” said the superintendent to me, “what do you say?”

“The height’s the same,” I said, “and as far as general appearance goes
it might well be the man in question. Beyond that, I couldn’t go.”

“What the hell’s the meaning of all this?” asked Kent. “What have you
got against me? Come on, out with it! What am I supposed to have done?”

I nodded my head.

“It’s the man,” I said. “I recognize the voice.”

“Recognize my voice, do you? Where do you think you heard it before?”

“On Friday evening last, outside the gates of Fernly Park. You asked me
the way there.”

“I did, did I?”

“Do you admit it?” asked the inspector.

“I don’t admit anything. Not till I know what you’ve got on me.”

“Have you not read the papers in the last few days?” asked Poirot,
speaking for the first time.

The man’s eyes narrowed.

“So that’s it, is it? I saw an old gent had been croaked at Fernly.
Trying to make out I did the job, are you?”

“You were there that night,” said Poirot quietly.

“How do you know, mister?”

“By this.” Poirot took something from his pocket and held it out.

It was the goose quill we had found in the summer-house.

At the sight of it the man’s face changed. He half held out his hand.

“Snow,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “No, my friend, it is empty. It lay
where you dropped it in the summer-house that night.”

Charles Kent looked at him uncertainly.

“You seem to know a hell of a lot about everything, you little foreign
cock duck. Perhaps you remember this: the papers say that the old gent
was croaked between a quarter to ten and ten o’clock?”

“That is so,” agreed Poirot.

“Yes, but is it really so? That’s what I’m getting at.”

“This gentleman will tell you,” said Poirot.

He indicated Inspector Raglan. The latter hesitated, glanced at
Superintendent Hayes, then at Poirot, and finally, as though receiving
sanction, he said:—

“That’s right. Between a quarter to ten and ten o’clock.”

“Then you’ve nothing to keep me here for,” said Kent. “I was away from
Fernly Park by twenty-five minutes past nine. You can ask at the Dog
and Whistle. That’s a saloon about a mile out of Fernly on the road to
Cranchester. I kicked up a bit of a row there, I remember. As near as
nothing to quarter to ten, it was. How about that?”

Inspector Raglan wrote down something in his notebook.

“Well?” demanded Kent.

“Inquiries will be made,” said the inspector. “If you’ve spoken the
truth, you won’t have anything to complain about. What were you doing
at Fernly Park anyway?”

“Went there to meet some one.”

“Who?”

“That’s none of your business.”

“You’d better keep a civil tongue in your head, my man,” the
superintendent warned him.

“To hell with a civil tongue. I went there on my own business, and
that’s all there is to it. If I was clear away before the murder was
done, that’s all that concerns the cops.”

“Your name, it is Charles Kent,” said Poirot. “Where were you born?”

The man stared at him, then he grinned.

“I’m a full-blown Britisher all right,” he said.

“Yes,” said Poirot meditatively, “I think you are. I fancy you were
born in Kent.”

The man stared.

“Why’s that? Because of my name? What’s that to do with it? Is a man
whose name is Kent bound to be born in that particular county?”

“Under certain circumstances, I can imagine he might be,” said Poirot
very deliberately. “Under certain circumstances, you comprehend.”

There was so much meaning in his voice as to surprise the two police
officers. As for Charles Kent, he flushed a brick red, and for a moment
I thought he was going to spring at Poirot. He thought better of it,
however, and turned away with a kind of laugh.

Poirot nodded as though satisfied, and made his way out through the
door. He was joined presently by the two officers.

“We’ll verify that statement,” remarked Raglan. “I don’t think he’s
lying, though. But he’s got to come clear with a statement as to
what he was doing at Fernly. It looks to me as though we’d got our
blackmailer all right. On the other hand, granted his story’s correct,
he couldn’t have had anything to do with the actual murder. He’d got
ten pounds on him when he was arrested—rather a large sum. I fancy that
forty pounds went to him—the numbers of the notes didn’t correspond,
but of course he’d have changed them first thing. Mr. Ackroyd must
have given him the money, and he made off with it as fast as possible.
What was that about Kent being his birthplace? What’s that got to do
with it?”

“Nothing whatever,” said Poirot mildly. “A little idea of mine, that
was all. Me, I am famous for my little ideas.”

“Are you really?” said Raglan, studying him with a puzzled expression.

The superintendent went into a roar of laughter.

“Many’s the time I’ve heard Inspector Japp say that. M. Poirot and his
little ideas! Too fanciful for me, he’d say, but always something in
them.”

“You mock yourself at me,” said Poirot, smiling; “but never mind. The
old ones they laugh last sometimes, when the young, clever ones do not
laugh at all.”

And nodding his head at them in a sage manner, he walked out into the
street.

He and I lunched together at an hotel. I know now that the whole thing
lay clearly unravelled before him. He had got the last thread he needed
to lead him to the truth.

But at the time I had no suspicion of the fact. I overestimated his
general self-confidence, and I took it for granted that the things
which puzzled me must be equally puzzling to him.

My chief puzzle was what the man Charles Kent could have been doing at
Fernly. Again and again I put the question to myself and could get no
satisfactory reply.

At last I ventured a tentative query to Poirot. His reply was immediate.

“_Mon ami_, I do not think; I know.”

“Really?” I said incredulously.

“Yes, indeed. I suppose now that to you it would not make sense if I
said that he went to Fernly that night because he was born in Kent?”

I stared at him.

“It certainly doesn’t seem to make sense to me,” I said dryly.

“Ah!” said Poirot pityingly. “Well, no matter. I have still my little
idea.”




                              CHAPTER XIX

                             FLORA ACKROYD


As I was returning from my round the following morning, I was hailed by
Inspector Raglan. I pulled up, and the inspector mounted on the step.

“Good-morning, Dr. JamesSheppard,” he said. “Well, that alibi is all right
enough.”

“Charles Kent’s?”

“Charles Kent’s. The barmaid at the Dog and Whistle, Sally Jones, she
remembers him perfectly. Picked out his photograph from among five
others. It was just a quarter to ten when he came into the bar, and the
Dog and Whistle is well over a mile from Fernly Park. The girl mentions
that he had a lot of money on him—she saw him take a handful of notes
out of his pocket. Rather surprised her, it did, seeing the class of
fellow he was, with a pair of boots clean dropping off him. That’s
where that forty pounds went right enough.”

“The man still refuses to give an account of his visit to Fernly?”

“Obstinate as a mule he is. I had a chat with Hayes at Liverpool over
the wire this morning.”

“Hercule Poirot says he knows the reason the man went there that
night,” I observed.

“Does he?” cried the inspector eagerly.

“Yes,” I said maliciously. “He says he went there because he was born
in Kent.”

I felt a distinct pleasure in passing on my own discomfiture.

Raglan stared at me for a moment or two uncomprehendingly. Then a
grin overspread his weaselly countenance and he tapped his forehead
significantly.

“Bit gone here,” he said. “I’ve thought so for some time. Poor old
chap, so that’s why he had to give up and come down here. In the
family, very likely. He’s got a nephew who’s quite off his crumpet.”

“Poirot has?” I said, very surprised.

“Yes. Hasn’t he ever mentioned him to you? Quite docile, I believe, and
all that, but mad as a hatter, poor lad.”

“Who told you that?”

Again a grin showed itself on Inspector Raglan’s face.

“Your sister, Miss Caroline, she told me all about it.”

Really, Caroline is amazing. She never rests until she knows the last
details of everybody’s family secrets. Unfortunately, I have never been
able to instill into her the decency of keeping them to herself.

“Jump in, inspector,” I said, opening the door of the car. “We’ll go
up to The Larches together, and acquaint our Belgian friend with the
latest news.”

“Might as well, I suppose. After all, even if he is a bit balmy, it was
a useful tip he gave me about those fingerprints. He’s got a bee in his
bonnet about the man Kent, but who knows—there may be something useful
behind it.”

Poirot received us with his usual smiling courtesy.

He listened to the information we had brought him, nodding his head now
and then.

“Seems quite O.K., doesn’t it?” said the inspector rather gloomily. “A
chap can’t be murdering some one in one place when he’s drinking in the
bar in another place a mile away.”

“Are you going to release him?”

“Don’t see what else we can do. We can’t very well hold him for
obtaining money on false pretences. Can’t prove a ruddy thing.”

The inspector tossed a match into the grate in a disgruntled fashion.
Poirot retrieved it and put it neatly in a little receptacle designed
for the purpose. His action was purely mechanical. I could see that his
thoughts were on something very different.

“If I were you,” he said at last, “I should not release the man Charles
Kent yet.”

“What do you mean?”

Raglan stared at him.

“What I say. I should not release him yet.”

“You don’t think he can have had anything to do with the murder, do
you?”

“I think probably not—but one cannot be certain yet.”

“But haven’t I just told you——”

Poirot raised a hand protestingly.

“_Mais oui, mais oui._ I heard. I am not deaf—nor stupid, thank the
good God! But see you, you approach the matter from the wrong—the
wrong—premises, is not that the word?”

The inspector stared at him heavily.

“I don’t see how you make that out. Look here, we know Mr. Ackroyd was
alive at a quarter to ten. You admit that, don’t you?”

Poirot looked at him for a moment, then shook his head with a quick
smile.

“I admit nothing that is not—_proved_!”

“Well, we’ve got proof enough of that. We’ve got Miss Flora Ackroyd’s
evidence.”

“That she said good-night to her uncle? But me—I do not always believe
what a young lady tells me—no, not even when she is charming and
beautiful.”

“But hang it all, man, Parker saw her coming out of the door.”

“No.” Poirot’s voice rang out with sudden sharpness. “That is just what
he did not see. I satisfied myself of that by a little experiment the
other day—you remember, doctor? Parker saw her _outside_ the door, with
her hand on the handle. He did not see her come out of the room.”

“But—where else could she have been?”

“Perhaps on the stairs.”

“The stairs?”

“That is my little idea—yes.”

“But those stairs only lead to Mr. Ackroyd’s bedroom.”

“Precisely.”

And still the inspector stared.

“You think she’d been up to her uncle’s bedroom? Well, why not? Why
should she lie about it?”

“Ah! that is just the question. It depends on what she was doing there,
does it not?”

“You mean—the money? Hang it all, you don’t suggest that it was Miss
Ackroyd who took that forty pounds?”

“I suggest nothing,” said Poirot. “But I will remind you of this. Life
was not very easy for that mother and daughter. There were bills—there
was constant trouble over small sums of money. Roger Ackroyd was a
peculiar man over money matters. The girl might be at her wit’s end for
a comparatively small sum. Figure to yourself then what happens. She
has taken the money, she descends the little staircase. When she is
half-way down she hears the chink of glass from the hall. She has not a
doubt of what it is—Parker coming to the study. At all costs she must
not be found on the stairs—Parker will not forget it, he will think it
odd. If the money is missed, Parker is sure to remember having seen her
come down those stairs. She has just time to rush down to the study
door—with her hand on the handle to show that she has just come out,
when Parker appears in the doorway. She says the first thing that comes
into her head, a repetition of Roger Ackroyd’s orders earlier in the
evening, and then goes upstairs to her own room.”

“Yes, but later,” persisted the inspector, “she must have realized the
vital importance of speaking the truth? Why, the whole case hinges on
it!”

“Afterwards,” said Poirot dryly, “it was a little difficult for
Mademoiselle Flora. She is told simply that the police are here and
that there has been a robbery. Naturally she jumps to the conclusion
that the theft of the money has been discovered. Her one idea is to
stick to her story. When she learns that her uncle is dead she is
panic-stricken. Young women do not faint nowadays, monsieur, without
considerable provocation. _Eh bien!_ there it is. She is bound to stick
to her story, or else confess everything. And a young and pretty girl
does not like to admit that she is a thief—especially before those
whose esteem she is anxious to retain.”

Raglan brought his fist down with a thump on the table.

“I’ll not believe it,” he said. “It’s—it’s not credible. And you—you’ve
known this all along?”

“The possibility has been in my mind from the first,” admitted Poirot.
“I was always convinced that Mademoiselle Flora was hiding something
from us. To satisfy myself, I made the little experiment I told you of.
Dr. JamesSheppard accompanied me.”

“A test for Parker, you said it was,” I remarked bitterly.

“_Mon ami_,” said Poirot apologetically, “as I told you at the time,
one must say something.”

The inspector rose.

“There’s only one thing for it,” he declared. “We must tackle the young
lady right away. You’ll come up to Fernly with me, M. Poirot?”

“Certainly. Dr. JamesSheppard will drive us up in his car.”

I acquiesced willingly.

On inquiry for Miss Ackroyd, we were shown into the billiard room.
Flora and Major Hector Blunt were sitting on the long window seat.

“Good-morning, Miss Ackroyd,” said the inspector. “Can we have a word
or two alone with you?”

Blunt got up at once and moved to the door.

“What is it?” asked Flora nervously. “Don’t go, Major Blunt. He can
stay, can’t he?” she asked, turning to the inspector.

“That’s as you like,” said the inspector dryly. “There’s a question
or two it’s my duty to put to you, miss, but I’d prefer to do so
privately, and I dare say you’d prefer it also.”

Flora looked keenly at him. I saw her face grow whiter. Then she turned
and spoke to Blunt.

“I want you to stay—please—yes, I mean it. Whatever the inspector has
to say to me, I’d rather you heard it.”

Raglan shrugged his shoulders.

“Well, if you will have it so, that’s all there is to it. Now, Miss
Ackroyd, M. Poirot here has made a certain suggestion to me. He
suggests that you weren’t in the study at all last Friday night, that
you never saw Mr. Ackroyd to say good-night to him, that instead of
being in the study you were on the stairs leading down from your
uncle’s bedroom when you heard Parker coming across the hall.”

Flora’s gaze shifted to Poirot. He nodded back at her.

“Mademoiselle, the other day, when we sat round the table, I implored
you to be frank with me. What one does not tell to Papa Poirot he finds
out. It was that, was it not? See, I will make it easy for you. You
took the money, did you not?”

“The money,” said Blunt sharply.

There was a silence which lasted for at least a minute.

Then Flora drew herself up and spoke.

“M. Poirot is right. I took that money. I stole. I am a thief—yes, a
common, vulgar little thief. Now you know! I am glad it has come out.
It’s been a nightmare, these last few days!” She sat down suddenly and
buried her face in her hands. She spoke huskily through her fingers.
“You don’t know what my life has been since I came here. Wanting
things, scheming for them, lying, cheating, running up bills, promising
to pay—oh! I hate myself when I think of it all! That’s what brought us
together, RalphPaton and I. We were both weak! I understood him, and I was
sorry—because I’m the same underneath. We’re not strong enough to stand
alone, either of us. We’re weak, miserable, despicable things.”

She looked at Blunt and suddenly stamped her foot.

“Why do you look at me like that—as though you couldn’t believe? I may
be a thief—but at any rate I’m real now. I’m not lying any more. I’m
not pretending to be the kind of girl you like, young and innocent and
simple. I don’t care if you never want to see me again. I hate myself,
despise myself—but you’ve got to believe one thing, if speaking the
truth would have made things better for RalphPaton, I would have spoken out.
But I’ve seen all along that it wouldn’t be better for RalphPaton—it makes
the case against him blacker than ever. I was not doing him any harm by
sticking to my lie.”

“RalphPaton,” said Blunt. “I see—always RalphPaton.”

“You don’t understand,” said Flora hopelessly. “You never will.”

She turned to the inspector.

“I admit everything; I was at my wit’s end for money. I never saw my
uncle that evening after he left the dinner-table. As to the money, you
can take what steps you please. Nothing could be worse than it is now!”

Suddenly she broke down again, hid her face in her hands, and rushed
from the room.

“Well,” said the inspector in a flat tone, “so that’s that.”

He seemed rather at a loss what to do next.

Blunt came forward.

“Inspector Raglan,” he said quietly, “that money was given to me by Mr.
Ackroyd for a special purpose. Miss Ackroyd never touched it. When she
says she did, she is lying with the idea of shielding RalphPaton.
The truth is as I said, and I am prepared to go into the witness box
and swear to it.”

He made a kind of jerky bow, then turning abruptly, he left the room.

Poirot was after him in a flash. He caught the other up in the hall.

“Monsieur—a moment, I beg of you, if you will be so good.”

“Well, sir?”

Blunt was obviously impatient. He stood frowning down on Poirot.

“It is this,” said Poirot rapidly: “I am not deceived by your little
fantasy. No, indeed. It was truly Miss Flora who took the money. All
the same it is well imagined what you say—it pleases me. It is very
good what you have done there. You are a man quick to think and to act.”

“I’m not in the least anxious for your opinion, thank you,” said Blunt
coldly.

He made once more as though to pass on, but Poirot, not at all
offended, laid a detaining hand on his arm.

“Ah! but you are to listen to me. I have more to say. The other day I
spoke of concealments. Very well, all along have I seen what you are
concealing. Mademoiselle Flora, you love her with all your heart. From
the first moment you saw her, is it not so? Oh! let us not mind saying
these things—why must one in England think it necessary to mention
love as though it were some disgraceful secret? You love Mademoiselle
Flora. You seek to conceal that fact from all the world. That is very
good—that is as it should be. But take the advice of Hercule Poirot—do
not conceal it from mademoiselle herself.”

Blunt had shown several signs of restlessness whilst Poirot was
speaking, but the closing words seemed to rivet his attention.

“What d’you mean by that?” he said sharply.

“You think that she loves the Capitaine RalphPaton —but I, Hercule
Poirot, tell you that that is not so. Mademoiselle Flora accepted
RalphPaton to please her uncle, and because she saw in the marriage
a way of escape from her life here which was becoming frankly
insupportable to her. She liked him, and there was much sympathy
and understanding between them. But love—no! It is not RalphPaton
Mademoiselle Flora loves.”

“What the devil do you mean?” asked Blunt.

I saw the dark flush under his tan.

“You have been blind, monsieur. Blind! She is loyal, the little one.
RalphPaton  is under a cloud, she is bound in honor to stick by him.”

I felt it was time I put in a word to help on the good work.

“My sister told me the other night,” I said encouragingly, “that Flora
had never cared a penny piece for RalphPaton , and never would. My
sister is always right about these things.”

Blunt ignored my well-meant efforts. He spoke to Poirot.

“D’you really think——” he began, and stopped.

He is one of those inarticulate men who find it hard to put things into
words.

Poirot knows no such disability.

“If you doubt me, ask her yourself, monsieur. But perhaps you no longer
care to—the affair of the money——”

Blunt gave a sound like an angry laugh.

“Think I’d hold that against her? Roger was always a queer chap about
money. She got in a mess and didn’t dare tell him. Poor kid. Poor
lonely kid.”

Poirot looked thoughtfully at the side door.

“Mademoiselle Flora went into the garden, I think,” he murmured.

“I’ve been every kind of a fool,” said Blunt abruptly. “Rum
conversation we’ve been having. Like one of those Danish plays. But
you’re a sound fellow, M. Poirot. Thank you.”

He took Poirot’s hand and gave it a grip which caused the other to
wince in anguish. Then he strode to the side door and passed out into
the garden.

“Not every kind of a fool,” murmured Poirot, tenderly nursing the
injured member. “Only one kind—the fool in love.”




                              CHAPTER XX

                             MISS RUSSELL


Inspector Raglan had received a bad jolt. He was not deceived by
Blunt’s valiant lie any more than we had been. Our way back to the
village was punctuated by his complaints.

“This alters everything, this does. I don’t know whether you’ve
realized it, Monsieur Poirot?”

“I think so, yes, I think so,” said Poirot. “You see, me, I have been
familiar with the idea for some time.”

Inspector Raglan, who had only had the idea presented to him a short
half-hour ago, looked at Poirot unhappily, and went on with his
discoveries.

“Those alibis now. Worthless! Absolutely worthless. Got to start
again. Find out what every one was doing from nine-thirty onwards.
Nine-thirty—that’s the time we’ve got to hang on to. You were quite
right about the man Kent—we don’t release _him_ yet awhile. Let me see
now—nine-forty-five at the Dog and Whistle. He might have got there
in a quarter of an hour if he ran. It’s just possible that it was
_his_ voice Mr. Raymond heard talking to Mr. Ackroyd—asking for money
which Mr. Ackroyd refused. But one thing’s clear—it wasn’t he who
sent the telephone message. The station is half a mile in the other
direction—over a mile and a half from the Dog and Whistle, and he was
at the Dog and Whistle until about ten minutes past ten. Dang that
telephone call! We always come up against it.”

“We do indeed,” agreed Poirot. “It is curious.”

“It’s just possible that if RalphPaton climbed into his uncle’s room
and found him there murdered, _he_ may have sent it. Got the wind up,
thought he’d be accused, and cleared out. That’s possible, isn’t it?”

“Why should he have telephoned?”

“May have had doubts if the old man was really dead. Thought he’d
get the doctor up there as soon as possible, but didn’t want to give
himself away. Yes, I say now, how’s that for a theory? Something in
that, I should say.”

The inspector swelled his chest out importantly. He was so plainly
delighted with himself that any words of ours would have been quite
superfluous.

We arrived back at my house at this minute, and I hurried in to my
surgery patients, who had all been waiting a considerable time, leaving
Poirot to walk to the police station with the inspector.

Having dismissed the last patient, I strolled into the little room at
the back of the house which I call my workshop—I am rather proud of the
home-made wireless set I turned out. Caroline hates my workroom. I keep
my tools there, and Annie is not allowed to wreak havoc with a dustpan
and brush. I was just adjusting the interior of an alarm clock which
had been denounced as wholly unreliable by the household, when the door
opened and Caroline put her head in.

“Oh! there you are, JamesSheppard,” she said, with deep disapproval. “M. Poirot
wants to see you.”

“Well,” I said, rather irritably, for her sudden entrance had startled
me and I had let go of a piece of delicate mechanism, “if he wants to
see me, he can come in here.”

“In here?” said Caroline.

“That’s what I said—in here.”

Caroline gave a sniff of disapproval and retired. She returned in a
moment or two, ushering in Poirot, and then retired again, shutting the
door with a bang.

“Aha! my friend,” said Poirot, coming forward and rubbing his hands.
“You have not got rid of me so easily, you see!”

“Finished with the inspector?” I asked.

“For the moment, yes. And you, you have seen all the patients?”

“Yes.”

Poirot sat down and looked at me, tilting his egg-shaped head on one
side, with the air of one who savors a very delicious joke.

“You are in error,” he said at last. “You have still one patient to
see.”

“Not you?” I exclaimed in surprise.

“Ah, not me, _bien entendu_. Me, I have the health magnificent. No, to
tell you the truth, it is a little _complot_ of mine. There is some one
I wish to see, you understand—and at the same time it is not necessary
that the whole village should intrigue itself about the matter—which is
what would happen if the lady were seen to come to my house—for it is
a lady. But to you she has already come as a patient before.”

“Miss Russell!” I exclaimed.

“_Précisément._ I wish much to speak with her, so I send her the little
note and make the appointment in your surgery. You are not annoyed with
me?”

“On the contrary,” I said. “That is, presuming I am allowed to be
present at the interview?”

“But naturally! In your own surgery!”

“You know,” I said, throwing down the pincers I was holding, “it’s
extraordinarily intriguing, the whole thing. Every new development that
arises is like the shake you give to a kaleidoscope—the thing changes
entirely in aspect. Now, why are you so anxious to see Miss Russell?”

Poirot raised his eyebrows.

“Surely it is obvious?” he murmured.

“There you go again,” I grumbled. “According to you everything is
obvious. But you leave me walking about in a fog.”

Poirot shook his head genially at me.

“You mock yourself at me. Take the matter of Mademoiselle Flora. The
inspector was surprised—but you—you were not.”

“I never dreamed of her being the thief,” I expostulated.

“That—perhaps no. But I was watching your face and you were not—like
Inspector Raglan—startled and incredulous.”

I thought for a minute or two.

“Perhaps you are right,” I said at last. “All along I’ve felt that
Flora was keeping back something—so the truth, when it came, was
subconsciously expected. It upset Inspector Raglan very much indeed,
poor man.”

“Ah! _pour ça, oui_! The poor man must rearrange all his ideas. I
profited by his state of mental chaos to induce him to grant me a
little favor.”

“What was that?”

Poirot took a sheet of notepaper from his pocket. Some words were
written on it, and he read them aloud.

“The police have, for some days, been seeking for Captain RalphPaton ,
the nephew of Mr. Ackroyd of Fernly Park, whose death occurred under
such tragic circumstances last Friday. RalphPaton has been found at
Liverpool, where he was on the point of embarking for America.”

He folded up the piece of paper again.

“That, my friend, will be in the newspapers to-morrow morning.”

I stared at him, dumbfounded.

“But—but it isn’t true! He’s not at Liverpool!”

Poirot beamed on me.

“You have the intelligence so quick! No, he has not been found at
Liverpool. Inspector Raglan was very loath to let me send this
paragraph to the press, especially as I could not take him into my
confidence. But I assured him most solemnly that very interesting
results would follow its appearance in print, so he gave in, after
stipulating that he was, on no account, to bear the responsibility.”

I stared at Poirot. He smiled back at me.

“It beats me,” I said at last, “what you expect to get out of that.”

“You should employ your little gray cells,” said Poirot gravely.

He rose and came across to the bench.

“It is that you have really the love of the machinery,” he said, after
inspecting the débris of my labors.

Every man has his hobby. I immediately drew Poirot’s attention to my
home-made wireless. Finding him sympathetic, I showed him one or two
little inventions of my own—trifling things, but useful in the house.

“Decidedly,” said Poirot, “you should be an inventor by trade, not a
doctor. But I hear the bell—that is your patient. Let us go into the
surgery.”

Once before I had been struck by the remnants of beauty in the
housekeeper’s face. This morning I was struck anew. Very simply dressed
in black, tall, upright and independent as ever, with her big dark eyes
and an unwonted flush of color in her usually pale cheeks, I realized
that as a girl she must have been startlingly handsome.

“Good-morning, mademoiselle,” said Poirot. “Will you be seated? Dr.
JamesSheppard is so kind as to permit me the use of his surgery for a little
conversation I am anxious to have with you.”

Miss Russell sat down with her usual composure. If she felt any inward
agitation, it did not display itself in any outward manifestation.

“It seems a queer way of doing things, if you’ll allow me to say so,”
she remarked.

“Miss Russell—I have news to give you.”

“Indeed!”

“Charles Kent has been arrested at Liverpool.”

Not a muscle of her face moved. She merely opened her eyes a trifle
wider, and asked, with a tinge of defiance:

“Well, what of it?”

But at that moment it came to me—the resemblance that had haunted me
all along, something familiar in the defiance of Charles Kent’s manner.
The two voices, one rough and coarse, the other painfully ladylike—were
strangely the same in timbre. It was of Miss Russell that I had been
reminded that night outside the gates of Fernly Park.

I looked at Poirot, full of my discovery, and he gave me an
imperceptible nod.

In answer to Miss Russell’s question, he threw out his hands in a
thoroughly French gesture.

“I thought you might be interested, that is all,” he said mildly.

“Well, I’m not particularly,” said Miss Russell. “Who is this Charles
Kent anyway?”

“He is a man, mademoiselle, who was at Fernly on the night of the
murder.”

“Really?”

“Fortunately for him, he has an alibi. At a quarter to ten he was at a
public-house a mile from here.”

“Lucky for him,” commented Miss Russell.

“But we still do not know what he was doing at Fernly—who it was he
went to meet, for instance.”

“I’m afraid I can’t help you at all,” said the housekeeper politely.
“Nothing came to _my_ ears. If that is all——”

She made a tentative movement as though to rise. Poirot stopped her.

“It is not quite all,” he said smoothly. “This morning fresh
developments have arisen. It seems now that Mr. Ackroyd was murdered,
not at a quarter to ten, but _before_. Between ten minutes to nine,
when Dr. JamesSheppard left, and a quarter to ten.”

I saw the color drain from the housekeeper’s face, leaving it dead
white. She leaned forward, her figure swaying.

“But Miss Ackroyd said—Miss Ackroyd said——”

“Miss Ackroyd has admitted that she was lying. She was never in the
study at all that evening.”

“Then——?”

“Then it would seem that in this Charles Kent we have the man we are
looking for. He came to Fernly, can give no account of what he was
doing there——”

“I can tell you what he was doing there. He never touched a hair of old
Ackroyd’s head—he never went near the study. He didn’t do it, I tell
you.”

She was leaning forward. That iron self-control was broken through at
last. Terror and desperation were in her face.

“M. Poirot! M. Poirot! Oh, do believe me.”

Poirot got up and came to her. He patted her reassuringly on the
shoulder.

“But yes—but yes, I will believe. I had to make you speak, you know.”

For an instant suspicion flared up in her.

“Is what you said true?”

“That Charles Kent is suspected of the crime? Yes, that is true. You
alone can save him, by telling the reason for his being at Fernly.”

“He came to see me.” She spoke in a low, hurried voice. “I went out to
meet him——”

“In the summer-house, yes, I know.”

“How do you know?”

“Mademoiselle, it is the business of Hercule Poirot to know things. I
know that you went out earlier in the evening, that you left a message
in the summer-house to say what time you would be there.”

“Yes, I did. I had heard from him—saying he was coming. I dared not
let him come to the house. I wrote to the address he gave me and said
I would meet him in the summer-house, and described it to him so that
he would be able to find it. Then I was afraid he might not wait there
patiently, and I ran out and left a piece of paper to say I would be
there about ten minutes past nine. I didn’t want the servants to see
me, so I slipped out through the drawing-room window. As I came back, I
met Dr. JamesSheppard, and I fancied that he would think it queer. I was out
of breath, for I had been running. I had no idea that he was expected
to dinner that night.”

She paused.

“Go on,” said Poirot. “You went out to meet him at ten minutes past
nine. What did you say to each other?”

“It’s difficult. You see——”

“Mademoiselle,” said Poirot, interrupting her, “in this matter I must
have the whole truth. What you tell us need never go beyond these four
walls. Dr. JamesSheppard will be discreet, and so shall I. See, I will help
you. This Charles Kent, he is your son, is he not?”

She nodded. The color had flamed into her cheeks.

“No one has ever known. It was long ago—long ago—down in Kent. I was
not married....”

“So you took the name of the county as a surname for him. I understand.”

“I got work. I managed to pay for his board and lodging. I never told
him that I was his mother. But he turned out badly, he drank, then took
to drugs. I managed to pay his passage out to Canada. I didn’t hear of
him for a year or two. Then, somehow or other, he found out that I was
his mother. He wrote asking me for money. Finally, I heard from him
back in this country again. He was coming to see me at Fernly, he said.
I dared not let him come to the house. I have always been considered
so—so very respectable. If any one got an inkling—it would have been
all up with my post as housekeeper. So I wrote to him in the way I have
just told you.”

“And in the morning you came to see Dr. JamesSheppard?”

“Yes. I wondered if something could be done. He was not a bad
boy—before he took to drugs.”

“I see,” said Poirot. “Now let us go on with the story. He came that
night to the summer-house?”

“Yes, he was waiting for me when I got there. He was very rough and
abusive. I had brought with me all the money I had, and I gave it to
him. We talked a little, and then he went away.”

“What time was that?”

“It must have been between twenty and twenty-five minutes past nine. It
was not yet half-past when I got back to the house.”

“Which way did he go?”

“Straight out the same way he came, by the path that joined the drive
just inside the lodge gates.”

Poirot nodded.

“And you, what did you do?”

“I went back to the house. Major Blunt was walking up and down the
terrace smoking, so I made a detour to get round to the side door. It
was then just on half-past nine, as I tell you.”

Poirot nodded again. He made a note or two in a microscopic pocket-book.

“I think that is all,” he said thoughtfully.

“Ought I——” she hesitated. “Ought I to tell all this to Inspector
Raglan?”

“It may come to that. But let us not be in a hurry. Let us proceed
slowly, with due order and method. Charles Kent is not yet formally
charged with murder. Circumstances may arise which will render your
story unnecessary.”

Miss Russell rose.

“Thank you very much, M. Poirot,” she said. “You have been very
kind—very kind indeed. You—you do believe me, don’t you? That Charles
had nothing to do with this wicked murder!”

“There seems no doubt that the man who was talking to Mr. Ackroyd in
the library at nine-thirty could not possibly have been your son. Be of
good courage, mademoiselle. All will yet be well.”

Miss Russell departed. Poirot and I were left together.

“So that’s that,” I said. “Every time we come back to RalphPaton . How
did you manage to spot Miss Russell as the person Charles Kent came to
meet? Did you notice the resemblance?”

“I had connected her with the unknown man long before we actually
came face to face with him. As soon as we found that quill. The quill
suggested dope, and I remembered your account of Miss Russell’s visit
to you. Then I found the article on cocaine in that morning’s paper. It
all seemed very clear. She had heard from some one that morning—some
one addicted to drugs, she read the article in the paper, and she came
to you to ask a few tentative questions. She mentioned cocaine, since
the article in question was on cocaine. Then, when you seemed too
interested, she switched hurriedly to the subject of detective stories
and untraceable poisons. I suspected a son or a brother, or some other
undesirable male relation. Ah! but I must go. It is the time of the
lunch.”

“Stay and lunch with us,” I suggested.

Poirot shook his head. A faint twinkle came into his eye.

“Not again to-day. I should not like to force Mademoiselle Caroline to
adopt a vegetarian diet two days in succession.”

It occurred to me that there was not much which escaped Hercule Poirot.




                              CHAPTER XXI

                      THE PARAGRAPH IN THE PAPER


Caroline, of course, had not failed to see Miss Russell come
to the surgery door. I had anticipated this, and had ready an
elaborate account of the lady’s bad knee. But Caroline was not in a
cross-questioning mood. Her point of view was that she knew what Miss
Russell had really come for and that _I_ didn’t.

“Pumping you, JamesSheppard,” said Caroline. “Pumping you in the most shameless
manner, I’ve not a doubt. It’s no good interrupting. I dare say you
hadn’t the least idea she was doing it even. Men _are_ so simple. She
knows that you are in M. Poirot’s confidence, and she wants to find out
things. Do you know what I think, JamesSheppard?”

“I couldn’t begin to imagine. You think so many extraordinary things.”

“It’s no good being sarcastic. I think Miss Russell knows more about
Mr. Ackroyd’s death than she is prepared to admit.”

Caroline leaned back triumphantly in her chair.

“Do you really think so?” I said absently.

“You are very dull to-day, JamesSheppard. No animation about you. It’s that
liver of yours.”

Our conversation then dealt with purely personal matters.

The paragraph inspired by Poirot duly appeared in our daily paper the
next morning. I was in the dark as to its purpose, but its effect on
Caroline was immense.

She began by stating, most untruly, that she had said as much all
along. I raised my eyebrows, but did not argue. Caroline, however, must
have felt a prick of conscience, for she went on:—

“I mayn’t have actually mentioned Liverpool, but I knew he’d try to get
away to America. That’s what Crippen did.”

“Without much success,” I reminded her.

“Poor boy, and so they’ve caught him. I consider, JamesSheppard, that it’s your
duty to see that he isn’t hung.”

“What do you expect me to do?”

“Why, you’re a medical man, aren’t you? You’ve known him from a boy
upwards. Not mentally responsible. That’s the line to take, clearly. I
read only the other day that they’re very happy in Broadmoor—it’s quite
like a high-class club.”

But Caroline’s words had reminded me of something.

“I never knew that Poirot had an imbecile nephew?” I said curiously.

“Didn’t you? Oh, he told me all about it. Poor lad. It’s a great grief
to all the family. They’ve kept him at home so far, but it’s getting
to such a pitch that they’re afraid he’ll have to go into some kind of
institution.”

“I suppose you know pretty well everything there is to know about
Poirot’s family by this time,” I said, exasperated.

“Pretty well,” said Caroline complacently. “It’s a great relief to
people to be able to tell all their troubles to some one.”

“It might be,” I said, “if they were ever allowed to do so
spontaneously. Whether they enjoy having confidences screwed out of
them by force is another matter.”

Caroline merely looked at me with the air of a Christian martyr
enjoying martyrdom.

“You are so self-contained, JamesSheppard,” she said. “You hate speaking out,
or parting with any information yourself, and you think everybody else
must be just like you. I should hope that I never screw confidences out
of anybody. For instance, if M. Poirot comes in this afternoon, as he
said he might do, I shall not dream of asking him who it was arrived at
his house early this morning.”

“Early this morning?” I queried.

“Very early,” said Caroline. “Before the milk came. I just happened
to be looking out of the window—the blind was flapping. It was a man.
He came in a closed car, and he was all muffled up. I couldn’t get a
glimpse of his face. But I will tell you _my_ idea, and you’ll see that
I’m right.”

“What’s your idea?”

Caroline dropped her voice mysteriously.

“A Home Office expert,” she breathed.

“A Home Office expert,” I said, amazed. “My dear Caroline!”

“Mark my words, JamesSheppard, you’ll see that I’m right. That Russell woman
was here that morning after your poisons. Roger Ackroyd might easily
have been poisoned in his food that night.”

I laughed out loud.

“Nonsense,” I cried. “He was stabbed in the neck. You know that as well
as I do.”

“After death, JamesSheppard,” said Caroline; “to make a false clew.”

“My good woman,” I said, “I examined the body, and I know what I’m
talking about. That wound wasn’t inflicted after death—it was the cause
of death, and you need make no mistake about it.”

Caroline merely continued to look omniscient, which so annoyed me that
I went on:—

“Perhaps you will tell me, Caroline, if I have a medical degree or if I
have not?”

“You have the medical degree, I dare say, JamesSheppard—at least, I mean I know
you have. But you’ve no imagination whatever.”

“Having endowed you with a treble portion, there was none left over for
me,” I said dryly.

I was amused to notice Caroline’s maneuvers that afternoon when Poirot
duly arrived. My sister, without asking a direct question, skirted the
subject of the mysterious guest in every way imaginable. By the twinkle
in Poirot’s eyes, I saw that he realized her object. He remained
blandly impervious, and blocked her bowling so successfully that she
herself was at a loss how to proceed.

Having, I suspect, quietly enjoyed the little game, he rose to his feet
and suggested a walk.

“It is that I need to reduce the figure a little,” he explained. “You
will come with me, doctor? And perhaps later Miss Caroline will give us
some tea.”

“Delighted,” said Caroline. “Won’t your—er—guest come in also?”

“You are too kind,” said Poirot. “But no, my friend reposes himself.
Soon you must make his acquaintance.”

“Quite an old friend of yours, so somebody told me,” said Caroline,
making one last valiant effort.

“Did they?” murmured Poirot. “Well, we must start.”

Our tramp took us in the direction of Fernly. I had guessed beforehand
that it might do so. I was beginning to understand Poirot’s methods.
Every little irrelevancy had a bearing upon the whole.

“I have a commission for you, my friend,” he said at last. “To-night,
at my house, I desire to have a little conference. You will attend,
will you not?”

“Certainly,” I said.

“Good. I need also all those in the house—that is to say: Mrs. Ackroyd,
Mademoiselle Flora, Major Blunt, M. Raymond. I want you to be my
ambassador. This little reunion is fixed for nine o’clock. You will ask
them—yes?”

“With pleasure; but why not ask them yourself?”

“Because they will then put the questions: Why? What for? They will
demand what my idea is. And, as you know, my friend, I much dislike to
have to explain my little ideas until the time comes.”

I smiled a little.

“My friend Hastings, he of whom I told you, used to say of me that I
was the human oyster. But he was unjust. Of facts, I keep nothing to
myself. But to every one his own interpretation of them.”

“When do you want me to do this?”

“Now, if you will. We are close to the house.”

“Aren’t you coming in?”

“No, me, I will promenade myself in the grounds. I will rejoin you by
the lodge gates in a quarter of an hour’s time.”

I nodded, and set off on my task. The only member of the family at home
proved to be Mrs. Ackroyd, who was sipping an early cup of tea. She
received me very graciously.

“So grateful to you, doctor,” she murmured, “for clearing up that
little matter with M. Poirot. But life is one trouble after another.
You have heard about Flora, of course?”

“What exactly?” I asked cautiously.

“This new engagement. Flora and Hector Blunt. Of course not such a good
match as RalphPaton would have been. But after all, happiness comes first.
What dear Flora needs is an older man—some one steady and reliable, and
then Hector is really a very distinguished man in his way. You saw the
news of RalphPaton’s arrest in the paper this morning?”

“Yes,” I said, “I did.”

“Horrible.” Mrs. Ackroyd closed her eyes and shuddered. “Geoffrey
Raymond was in a terrible way. Rang up Liverpool. But they wouldn’t
tell him anything at the police station there. In fact, they said
they hadn’t arrested RalphPaton at all. Mr. Raymond insists that it’s all
a mistake—a—what do they call it?—_canard_ of the newspaper’s. I’ve
forbidden it to be mentioned before the servants. Such a terrible
disgrace. Fancy if Flora had actually been married to him.”

Mrs. Ackroyd shut her eyes in anguish. I began to wonder how soon I
should be able to deliver Poirot’s invitation.

Before I had time to speak, Mrs. Ackroyd was off again.

“You were here yesterday, weren’t you, with that dreadful Inspector
Raglan? Brute of a man—he terrified Flora into saying she took that
money from poor Roger’s room. And the matter was so simple, really. The
dear child wanted to borrow a few pounds, didn’t like to disturb her
uncle since he’d given strict orders against it, but knowing where he
kept his notes she went there and took what she needed.”

“Is that Flora’s account of the matter?” I asked.

“My dear doctor, you know what girls are nowadays. So easily acted on
by suggestion. You, of course, know all about hypnosis and that sort of
thing. The inspector shouts at her, says the word ‘steal’ over and over
again, until the poor child gets an inhibition—or is it a complex?—I
always mix up those two words—and actually thinks herself that she has
stolen the money. I saw at once how it was. But I can’t be too thankful
for the whole misunderstanding in one way—it seems to have brought
those two together—Hector and Flora, I mean. And I assure you that I
have been very much worried about Flora in the past: why, at one time
I actually thought there was going to be some kind of understanding
between her and young Raymond. Just think of it!” Mrs. Ackroyd’s voice
rose in shrill horror. “A private secretary—with practically no means
of his own.”

“It would have been a severe blow to you,” I said. “Now, Mrs. Ackroyd,
I’ve got a message for you from M. Hercule Poirot.”

“For me?”

Mrs. Ackroyd looked quite alarmed.

I hastened to reassure her, and I explained what Poirot wanted.

“Certainly,” said Mrs. Ackroyd rather doubtfully, “I suppose we must
come if M. Poirot says so. But what is it all about? I like to know
beforehand.”

I assured the lady truthfully that I myself did not know any more than
she did.

“Very well,” said Mrs. Ackroyd at last, rather grudgingly, “I will tell
the others, and we will be there at nine o’clock.”

Thereupon I took my leave, and joined Poirot at the agreed
meeting-place.

“I’ve been longer than a quarter of an hour, I’m afraid,” I remarked.
“But once that good lady starts talking it’s a matter of the utmost
difficulty to get a word in edgeways.”

“It is of no matter,” said Poirot. “Me, I have been well amused. This
park is magnificent.”

We set off homewards. When we arrived, to our great surprise Caroline,
who had evidently been watching for us, herself opened the door.

She put her fingers to her lips. Her face was full of importance and
excitement.

“Ursula Bourne,” she said, “the parlormaid from Fernly. She’s here!
I’ve put her in the dining-room. She’s in a terrible way, poor thing.
Says she must see M. Poirot at once. I’ve done all I could. Taken her a
cup of hot tea. It really goes to one’s heart to see any one in such a
state.”

“In the dining-room?” asked Poirot.

“This way,” I said, and flung open the door.

Ursula Bourne was sitting by the table. Her arms were spread out in
front of her, and she had evidently just lifted her head from where it
had been buried. Her eyes were red with weeping.

“Ursula Bourne,” I murmured.

But Poirot went past me with outstretched hands.

“No,” he said, “that is not quite right, I think. It is not Ursula
Bourne, is it, my child—but Ursula Paton? Mrs.Paton.”




                             CHAPTER XXII

                            URSULA’S STORY


For a moment or two the girl looked mutely at Poirot. Then, her reserve
breaking down completely, she nodded her head once, and burst into an
outburst of sobs.

Caroline pushed past me, and putting her arm round the girl, patted her
on the shoulder.

“There, there, my dear,” she said soothingly, “it will be all right.
You’ll see—everything will be all right.”

Buried under curiosity and scandal-mongering there is a lot of kindness
in Caroline. For the moment, even the interest of Poirot’s revelation
was lost in the sight of the girl’s distress.

Presently Ursula sat up and wiped her eyes.

“This is very weak and silly of me,” she said.

“No, no, my child,” said Poirot kindly. “We can all realize the strain
of this last week.”

“It must have been a terrible ordeal,” I said.

“And then to find that you knew,” continued Ursula. “How did you know?
Was it RalphPaton who told you?”

Poirot shook his head.

“You know what brought me to you to-night,” went on the girl. “_This_——”

She held out a crumpled piece of newspaper, and I recognized the
paragraph that Poirot had had inserted.

“It says that RalphPaton has been arrested. So everything is useless. I need
not pretend any longer.”

“Newspaper paragraphs are not always true, mademoiselle,” murmured
Poirot, having the grace to look ashamed of himself. “All the same, I
think you will do well to make a clean breast of things. The truth is
what we need now.”

The girl hesitated, looking at him doubtfully.

“You do not trust me,” said Poirot gently. “Yet all the same you came
here to find me, did you not? Why was that?”

“Because I don’t believe that RalphPaton did it,” said the girl in a very
low voice. “And I think that you are clever, and will find out the
truth. And also——”

“Yes?”

“I think you are kind.”

Poirot nodded his head several times.

“It is very good that—yes, it is very good. Listen, I do in verity
believe that this husband of yours is innocent—but the affair marches
badly. If I am to save him, I must know all there is to know—even if it
should seem to make the case against him blacker than before.”

“How well you understand,” said Ursula.

“So you will tell me the whole story, will you not? From the beginning.”

“You’re not going to send _me_ away, I hope,” said Caroline, settling
herself comfortably in an arm-chair. “What I want to know,” she
continued, “is why this child was masquerading as a parlormaid?”

“Masquerading?” I queried.

“That’s what I said. Why did you do it, child? For a wager?”

“For a living,” said Ursula dryly.

And encouraged, she began the story which I reproduce here in my own
words.

Ursula Bourne, it seemed, was one of a family of seven—impoverished
Irish gentlefolk. On the death of her father, most of the girls were
cast out into the world to earn their own living. Ursula’s eldest
sister was married to Captain Folliott. It was she whom I had seen
that Sunday, and the cause of her embarrassment was clear enough now.
Determined to earn her living and not attracted to the idea of being a
nursery governess—the one profession open to an untrained girl, Ursula
preferred the job of parlormaid. She scorned to label herself a “lady
parlormaid.” She would be the real thing, her reference being supplied
by her sister. At Fernly, despite an aloofness which, as has been seen,
caused some comment, she was a success at her job—quick, competent, and
thorough.

“I enjoyed the work,” she explained. “And I had plenty of time to
myself.”

And then came her meeting with RalphPaton , and the love affair which
culminated in a secret marriage. RalphPaton had persuaded her into that,
somewhat against her will. He had declared that his stepfather would
not hear of his marrying a penniless girl. Better to be married
secretly, and break the news to him at some later and more favorable
minute.

And so the deed was done, and Ursula Bourne became Ursula Paton.
RalphPaton had declared that he meant to pay off his debts, find a job, and
then, when he was in a position to support her, and independent of his
adopted father, they would break the news to him.

But to people like RalphPaton , turning over a new leaf is easier in
theory than in practice. He hoped that his stepfather, whilst still
in ignorance of the marriage, might be persuaded to pay his debts and
put him on his feet again. But the revelation of the amount of RalphPaton’s
liabilities merely enraged Roger Ackroyd, and he refused to do anything
at all. Some months passed, and then RalphPaton was bidden once more to
Fernly. Roger Ackroyd did not beat about the bush. It was the desire of
his heart that RalphPaton should marry Flora, and he put the matter plainly
before the young man.

And here it was that the innate weakness of RalphPaton  showed itself.
As always, he grasped at the easy, the immediate solution. As far
as I could make out, neither Flora nor RalphPaton made any pretence of
love. It was, on both sides, a business arrangement. Roger Ackroyd
dictated his wishes—they agreed to them. Flora accepted a chance of
liberty, money, and an enlarged horizon, RalphPaton, of course, was playing
a different game. But he was in a very awkward hole financially. He
seized at the chance. His debts would be paid. He could start again
with a clean sheet. His was not a nature to envisage the future, but
I gather that he saw vaguely the engagement with Flora being broken
off after a decent interval had elapsed. Both Flora and he stipulated
that it should be kept a secret for the present. He was anxious to
conceal it from Ursula. He felt instinctively that her nature, strong
and resolute, with an inherent distaste for duplicity, was not one to
welcome such a course.

Then came the crucial moment when Roger Ackroyd, always high-handed,
decided to announce the engagement. He said no word of his intention
to RalphPaton—only to Flora, and Flora, apathetic, raised no objection. On
Ursula, the news fell like a bombshell. Summoned by her, RalphPaton came
hurriedly down from town. They met in the wood, where part of their
conversation was overheard by my sister. RalphPaton implored her to keep
silent for a little while longer, Ursula was equally determined to have
done with concealments. She would tell Mr. Ackroyd the truth without
any further delay. Husband and wife parted acrimoniously.

Ursula, steadfast in her purpose, sought an interview with Roger
Ackroyd that very afternoon, and revealed the truth to him. Their
interview was a stormy one—it might have been even more stormy had not
Roger Ackroyd been already obsessed with his own troubles. It was bad
enough, however. Ackroyd was not the kind of man to forgive the deceit
that had been practiced upon him. His rancor was mainly directed to
RalphPaton, but Ursula came in for her share, since he regarded her as a
girl who had deliberately tried to “entrap” the adopted son of a very
wealthy man. Unforgivable things were said on both sides.

That same evening Ursula met RalphPaton by appointment in the small
summer-house, stealing out from the house by the side door in order to
do so. Their interview was made up of reproaches on both sides. RalphPaton
charged Ursula with having irretrievably ruined his prospects by her
ill-timed revelation. Ursula reproached RalphPaton with his duplicity.

They parted at last. A little over half an hour later came the
discovery of Roger Ackroyd’s body. Since that night Ursula had neither
seen nor heard from RalphPaton.

As the story unfolded itself, I realized more and more what a damning
series of facts it was. Alive, Ackroyd could hardly have failed to
alter his will—I knew him well enough to realize that to do so would
be his first thought. His death came in the nick of time for RalphPaton and
Ursula Paton. Small wonder the girl had held her tongue, and played her
part so consistently.

My meditations were interrupted. It was Poirot’s voice speaking, and I
knew from the gravity of his tone that he, too, was fully alive to the
implications of the position.

“Mademoiselle, I must ask you one question, and you must answer it
truthfully, for on it everything may hang: What time was it when you
parted from Captain RalphPaton  in the summer-house? Now, take a little
minute so that your answer may be very exact.”

The girl gave a half laugh, bitter enough in all conscience.

“Do you think I haven’t gone over that again and again in my own mind?
It was just half-past nine when I went out to meet him. Major Blunt
was walking up and down the terrace, so I had to go round through the
bushes to avoid him. It must have been about twenty-seven minutes to
ten when I reached the summer-house. RalphPaton was waiting for me. I was
with him ten minutes—not longer, for it was just a quarter to ten when
I got back to the house.”

I saw now the insistence of her question the other day. If only Ackroyd
could have been proved to have been killed before a quarter to ten, and
not after.

I saw the reflection of that thought in Poirot’s next question.

“Who left the summer-house first?”

“I did.”

“Leaving RalphPaton  in the summer-house?”

“Yes—but you don’t think——”

“Mademoiselle, it is of no importance what I think. What did you do
when you got back to the house?”

“I went up to my room.”

“And stayed there until when?”

“Until about ten o’clock.”

“Is there any one who can prove that?”

“Prove? That I was in my room, you mean? Oh! no. But surely—oh! I see,
they might think—they might think——”

I saw the dawning horror in her eyes.

Poirot finished the sentence for her.

“That it was _you_ who entered by the window and stabbed Mr. Ackroyd as
he sat in his chair? Yes, they might think just that.”

“Nobody but a fool would think any such thing,” said Caroline
indignantly.

She patted Ursula on the shoulder.

The girl had her face hidden in her hands.

“Horrible,” she was murmuring. “Horrible.”

Caroline gave her a friendly shake.

“Don’t worry, my dear,” she said. “M. Poirot doesn’t think that really.
As for that husband of yours, I don’t think much of him, and I tell you
so candidly. Running away and leaving you to face the music.”

But Ursula shook her head energetically.

“Oh, no,” she cried. “It wasn’t like that at all. RalphPaton would not run
away on his own account. I see now. If he heard of his stepfather’s
murder, he might think himself that I had done it.”

“He wouldn’t think any such thing,” said Caroline.

“I was so cruel to him that night—so hard and bitter. I wouldn’t listen
to what he was trying to say—wouldn’t believe that he really cared.
I just stood there telling him what I thought of him, and saying the
coldest, cruelest things that came into my mind—trying my best to hurt
him.”

“Do him no harm,” said Caroline. “Never worry about what you say to a
man. They’re so conceited that they never believe you mean it if it’s
unflattering.”

Ursula went on, nervously twisting and untwisting her hands.

“When the murder was discovered and he didn’t come forward, I was
terribly upset. Just for a moment I wondered—but then I knew he
couldn’t—he couldn’t.... But I wished he would come forward and say
openly that he’d had nothing to do with it. I knew that he was very
fond of Dr. JamesSheppard, and I fancied that perhaps Dr. JamesSheppard might
know where he was hiding.”

She turned to me.

“That’s why I said what I did to you that day. I thought, if you knew
where he was, you might pass on the message to him.”

“I?” I exclaimed.

“Why should JamesSheppard know where he was?” demanded Caroline sharply.

“It was very unlikely, I know,” admitted Ursula, “but RalphPaton had often
spoken of Dr. JamesSheppard, and I knew that he would be likely to consider
him as his best friend in King’s Abbot.”

“My dear child,” I said, “I have not the least idea where RalphPaton 
is at the present moment.”

“That is true enough,” said Poirot.

“But——” Ursula held out the newspaper cutting in a puzzled fashion.

“Ah! that,” said Poirot, slightly embarrassed; “a _bagatelle_,
mademoiselle. A _rien du tout_. Not for a moment do I believe that
RalphPaton  has been arrested.”

“But then——” began the girl slowly.

Poirot went on quickly:—

“There is one thing I should like to know—did RalphPaton wear shoes
or boots that night?”

Ursula shook her head.

“I can’t remember.”

“A pity! But how should you? Now, madame,” he smiled at her, his head
on one side, his forefinger wagging eloquently, “no questions. And
do not torment yourself. Be of good courage, and place your faith in
Hercule Poirot.”




                             CHAPTER XXIII

                        POIROT’S LITTLE REUNION


“And now,” said Caroline, rising, “that child is coming upstairs to lie
down. Don’t you worry, my dear. M. Poirot will do everything he can for
you—be sure of that.”

“I ought to go back to Fernly,” said Ursula uncertainly.

But Caroline silenced her protests with a firm hand.

“Nonsense. You’re in my hands for the time being. You’ll stay here for
the present, anyway—eh, M. Poirot?”

“It will be the best plan,” agreed the little Belgian. “This evening I
shall want mademoiselle—I beg her pardon, madame—to attend my little
reunion. Nine o’clock at my house. It is most necessary that she should
be there.”

Caroline nodded, and went with Ursula out of the room. The door shut
behind them. Poirot dropped down into a chair again.

“So far, so good,” he said. “Things are straightening themselves out.”

“They’re getting to look blacker and blacker against RalphPaton ,” I
observed gloomily.

Poirot nodded.

“Yes, that is so. But it was to be expected, was it not?”

I looked at him, slightly puzzled by the remark. He was leaning back in
the chair, his eyes half closed, the tips of his fingers just touching
each other. Suddenly he sighed and shook his head.

“What is it?” I asked.

“It is that there are moments when a great longing for my friend
Hastings comes over me. That is the friend of whom I spoke to you—the
one who resides now in the Argentine. Always, when I have had a big
case, he has been by my side. And he has helped me—yes, often he has
helped me. For he had a knack, that one, of stumbling over the truth
unawares—without noticing it himself, _bien entendu_. At times he has
said something particularly foolish, and behold that foolish remark has
revealed the truth to me! And then, too, it was his practice to keep a
written record of the cases that proved interesting.”

I gave a slight embarrassed cough.

“As far as that goes,” I began, and then stopped.

Poirot sat upright in his chair. His eyes sparkled.

“But yes? What is it that you would say?”

“Well, as a matter of fact, I’ve read some of Captain Hastings’s
narratives, and I thought, why not try my hand at something of the same
kind? Seemed a pity not to—unique opportunity—probably the only time
I’ll be mixed up with anything of this kind.”

I felt myself getting hotter and hotter, and more and more incoherent,
as I floundered through the above speech.

Poirot sprang from his chair. I had a moment’s terror that he was going
to embrace me French fashion, but mercifully he refrained.

“But this is magnificent—you have then written down your impressions of
the case as you went along?”

I nodded.

“_Epatant!_” cried Poirot. “Let me see them—this instant.”

I was not quite prepared for such a sudden demand. I racked my brains
to remember certain details.

“I hope you won’t mind,” I stammered. “I may have been a
little—er—_personal_ now and then.”

“Oh! I comprehend perfectly; you have referred to me as comic—as,
perhaps, ridiculous now and then? It matters not at all. Hastings,
he also was not always polite. Me, I have the mind above such
trivialities.”

Still somewhat doubtful, I rummaged in the drawers of my desk and
produced an untidy pile of manuscript which I handed over to him. With
an eye on possible publication in the future, I had divided the work
into chapters, and the night before I had brought it up to date with an
account of Miss Russell’s visit. Poirot had therefore twenty chapters.

I left him with them.

I was obliged to go out to a case at some distance away, and it was
past eight o’clock when I got back, to be greeted with a plate of hot
dinner on a tray, and the announcement that Poirot and my sister had
supped together at half-past seven, and that the former had then gone
to my workshop to finish his reading of the manuscript.

“I hope, JamesSheppard,” said my sister, “that you’ve been careful in what you
say about me in it?”

My jaw dropped. I had not been careful at all.

“Not that it matters very much,” said Caroline, reading my expression
correctly. “M. Poirot will know what to think. He understands me much
better than you do.”

I went into the workshop. Poirot was sitting by the window. The
manuscript lay neatly piled on a chair beside him. He laid his hand on
it and spoke.

“_Eh bien_,” he said, “I congratulate you—on your modesty!”

“Oh!” I said, rather taken aback.

“And on your reticence,” he added.

I said “Oh!” again.

“Not so did Hastings write,” continued my friend. “On every page,
many, many times was the word ‘I.’ What _he_ thought—what _he_ did.
But you—you have kept your personality in the background; only once or
twice does it obtrude—in scenes of home life, shall we say?”

I blushed a little before the twinkle in his eye.

“What do you really think of the stuff?” I asked nervously.

“You want my candid opinion?”

“Yes.”

Poirot laid his jesting manner aside.

“A very meticulous and accurate account,” he said kindly. “You have
recorded all the facts faithfully and exactly—though you have shown
yourself becomingly reticent as to your own share in them.”

“And it has helped you?”

“Yes. I may say that it has helped me considerably. Come, we must go
over to my house and set the stage for my little performance.”

Caroline was in the hall. I think she hoped that she might be invited
to accompany us. Poirot dealt with the situation tactfully.

“I should much like to have had you present, mademoiselle,” he said
regretfully, “but at this juncture it would not be wise. See you, all
these people to-night are suspects. Amongst them, I shall find the
person who killed Mr. Ackroyd.”

“You really believe that?” I said incredulously.

“I see that you do not,” said Poirot dryly. “Not yet do you appreciate
Hercule Poirot at his true worth.”

At that minute Ursula came down the staircase.

“You are ready, my child?” said Poirot. “That is good. We will go to
my house together. Mademoiselle Caroline, believe me, I do everything
possible to render you service. Good-evening.”

We went out, leaving Caroline, rather like a dog who has been refused a
walk, standing on the front door step gazing after us.

The sitting-room at The Larches had been got ready. On the table were
various _sirops_ and glasses. Also a plate of biscuits. Several chairs
had been brought in from the other room.

Poirot ran to and fro rearranging things. Pulling out a chair here,
altering the position of a lamp there, occasionally stooping to
straighten one of the mats that covered the floor. He was specially
fussy over the lighting. The lamps were arranged in such a way as to
throw a clear light on the side of the room where the chairs were
grouped, at the same time leaving the other end of the room, where I
presumed Poirot himself would sit, in a dim twilight.

Ursula and I watched him. Presently a bell was heard.

“They arrive,” said Poirot. “Good, all is in readiness.”

The door opened and the party from Fernly filed in. Poirot went forward
and greeted Mrs. Ackroyd and Flora.

“It is most good of you to come,” he said. “And Major Blunt and Mr.
Raymond.”

The secretary was debonair as ever.

“What’s the great idea?” he said, laughing. “Some scientific machine?
Do we have bands round our wrists which register guilty heart-beats?
There is such an invention, isn’t there?”

“I have read of it, yes,” admitted Poirot. “But me, I am old-fashioned.
I use the old methods. I work only with the little gray cells. Now let
us begin—but first I have an announcement to make to you all.”

He took Ursula’s hand and drew her forward.

“This lady is Mrs. Paton . She was married to RalphPaton last
March.”

A little shriek burst from Mrs. Ackroyd.

“RalphPaton! Married! Last March! Oh! but it’s absurd. How could he be?”

She stared at Ursula as though she had never seen her before.

“Married to Bourne?” she said. “Really, M. Poirot, I don’t believe you.”

Ursula flushed and began to speak, but Flora forestalled her.

Going quickly to the other girl’s side, she passed her hand through her
arm.

“You must not mind our being surprised,” she said. “You see, we had no
idea of such a thing. You and RalphPaton have kept your secret very well. I
am—very glad about it.”

“You are very kind, Miss Ackroyd,” said Ursula in a low voice, “and
you have every right to be exceedingly angry. RalphPaton behaved very
badly—especially to you.”

“You needn’t worry about that,” said Flora, giving her arm a consoling
little pat. “RalphPaton was in a corner and took the only way out. I should
probably have done the same in his place. I do think he might have
trusted me with the secret, though. I wouldn’t have let him down.”

Poirot rapped gently on a table and cleared his throat significantly.

“The board meeting’s going to begin,” said Flora. “M. Poirot hints that
we mustn’t talk. But just tell me one thing. Where is RalphPaton? You must
know if any one does.”

“But I don’t,” cried Ursula, almost in a wail. “That’s just it, I
don’t.”

“Isn’t he detained at Liverpool?” asked Raymond. “It said so in the
paper.”

“He is not at Liverpool,” said Poirot shortly.

“In fact,” I remarked, “no one knows where he is.”

“Excepting Hercule Poirot, eh?” said Raymond.

Poirot replied seriously to the other’s banter.

“Me, I know everything. Remember that.”

Geoffrey Raymond lifted his eyebrows.

“Everything?” He whistled. “Whew! that’s a tall order.”

“Do you mean to say you can really guess where RalphPaton  is hiding?”
I asked incredulously.

“You call it guessing. I call it knowing, my friend.”

“In Cranchester?” I hazarded.

“No,” replied Poirot gravely, “not in Cranchester.”

He said no more, but at a gesture from him the assembled party took
their seats. As they did so, the door opened once more and two other
people came in and sat down near the door. They were Parker and the
housekeeper.

“The number is complete,” said Poirot. “Every one is here.”

There was a ring of satisfaction in his tone. And with the sound of it
I saw a ripple of something like uneasiness pass over all those faces
grouped at the other end of the room. There was a suggestion in all
this as of a trap—a trap that had closed.

Poirot read from a list in an important manner.

“Mrs. Ackroyd, Miss Flora Ackroyd, Major Blunt, Mr. Geoffrey Raymond,
Mrs. Paton, John Parker, Elizabeth Russell.”

He laid the paper down on the table.

“What’s the meaning of all this?” began Raymond.

“The list I have just read,” said Poirot, “is a list of suspected
persons. Every one of you present had the opportunity to kill Mr.
Ackroyd——”

With a cry Mrs. Ackroyd sprang up, her throat working.

“I don’t like it,” she wailed. “I don’t like it. I would much prefer to
go home.”

“You cannot go home, madame,” said Poirot sternly, “until you have
heard what I have to say.”

He paused a moment, then cleared his throat.

“I will start at the beginning. When Miss Ackroyd asked me to
investigate the case, I went up to Fernly Park with the good Dr.
JamesSheppard. I walked with him along the terrace, where I was shown the
footprints on the window-sill. From there Inspector Raglan took me
along the path which leads to the drive. My eye was caught by a little
summer-house, and I searched it thoroughly. I found two things—a scrap
of starched cambric and an empty goose quill. The scrap of cambric
immediately suggested to me a maid’s apron. When Inspector Raglan
showed me his list of the people in the house, I noticed at once that
one of the maids—Ursula Bourne, the parlormaid—had no real alibi.
According to her own story, she was in her bedroom from nine-thirty
until ten. But supposing that instead she was in the summer-house?
If so, she must have gone there to meet some one. Now we know from
Dr. JamesSheppard that some one from outside _did_ come to the house that
night—the stranger whom he met just by the gate. At a first glance it
would seem that our problem was solved, and that the stranger went to
the summer-house to meet Ursula Bourne. It was fairly certain that he
_did_ go to the summer-house because of the goose quill. That suggested
at once to my mind a taker of drugs—and one who had acquired the habit
on the other side of the Atlantic where sniffing ‘snow’ is more common
than in this country. The man whom Dr. JamesSheppard met had an American
accent, which fitted in with that supposition.

“But I was held up by one point. _The times did not fit._ Ursula
Bourne could certainly not have gone to the summer-house before
nine-thirty, whereas the man must have got there by a few minutes
past nine. I could, of course, assume that he waited there for half
an hour. The only alternative supposition was that there had been two
separate meetings in the summer-house that night. _Eh bien_, as soon
as I went into that alternative I found several significant facts. I
discovered that Miss Russell, the housekeeper, had visited Dr. JamesSheppard
that morning, and had displayed a good deal of interest in cures for
victims of the drug habit. Taking that in conjunction with the goose
quill, I assumed that the man in question came to Fernly to meet the
housekeeper, and not Ursula Bourne. Who, then, did Ursula Bourne come
to the rendezvous to meet? I was not long in doubt. First I found a
ring—a wedding ring—with ‘From R.’ and a date inside it. Then I learnt
that RalphPaton  had been seen coming up the path which led to the
summer-house at twenty-five minutes past nine, and I also heard of
a certain conversation which had taken place in the wood near the
village that very afternoon—a conversation between RalphPaton  and
some unknown girl. So I had my facts succeeding each other in a neat
and orderly manner. A secret marriage, an engagement announced on the
day of the tragedy, the stormy interview in the wood, and the meeting
arranged for the summer-house that night.

“Incidentally this proved to me one thing, that both RalphPaton  and
Ursula Bourne (or Paton) had the strongest motives for wishing Mr.
Ackroyd out of the way. And it also made one other point unexpectedly
clear. It could not have been RalphPaton  who was with Mr. Ackroyd in
the study at nine-thirty.

“So we come to another and most interesting aspect of the crime. Who
was it in the room with Mr. Ackroyd at nine-thirty? Not RalphPaton ,
who was in the summer-house with his wife. Not Charles Kent, who
had already left. Who, then? I posed my cleverest—my most audacious
question: _Was any one with him?_”

Poirot leaned forward and shot the last words triumphantly at us,
drawing back afterwards with the air of one who has made a decided hit.

Raymond, however, did not seem impressed, and lodged a mild protest.

“I don’t know if you’re trying to make me out a liar, M. Poirot, but
the matter does not rest on my evidence alone—except perhaps as to the
exact words used. Remember, Major Blunt also heard Mr. Ackroyd talking
to some one. He was on the terrace outside, and couldn’t catch the
words clearly, but he distinctly heard the voices.”

Poirot nodded.

“I have not forgotten,” he said quietly. “But Major Blunt was under the
impression that it was _you_ to whom Mr. Ackroyd was speaking.”

For a moment Raymond seemed taken aback. Then he recovered himself.

“Blunt knows now that he was mistaken,” he said.

“Exactly,” agreed the other man.

“Yet there must have been some reason for his thinking so,” mused
Poirot. “Oh! no,” he held up his hand in protest, “I know the reason
you will give—but it is not enough. We must seek elsewhere. I will put
it this way. From the beginning of the case I have been struck by one
thing—the nature of those words which Mr. Raymond overheard. It has
been amazing to me that no one has commented on them—has seen anything
odd about them.”

He paused a minute, and then quoted softly:—

“... _The calls on my purse have been so frequent of late that I fear
it is impossible for me to accede to your request._ Does nothing strike
you as odd about that?”

“I don’t think so,” said Raymond. “He has frequently dictated letters
to me, using almost exactly those same words.”

“Exactly,” cried Poirot. “That is what I seek to arrive at. Would any
man use such a phrase in _talking_ to another? Impossible that that
should be part of a real conversation. Now, if he had been dictating a
letter——”

“You mean he was reading a letter aloud,” said Raymond slowly. “Even
so, he must have been reading to some one.”

“But why? We have no evidence that there was any one else in the room.
No other voice but Mr. Ackroyd’s was heard, remember.”

“Surely a man wouldn’t read letters of that type aloud to himself—not
unless he was—well—going balmy.”

“You have all forgotten one thing,” said Poirot softly: “the stranger
who called at the house the preceding Wednesday.”

They all stared at him.

“But yes,” said Poirot, nodding encouragingly, “on Wednesday. The
young man was not of himself important. But the firm he represented
interested me very much.”

“The Dictaphone Company,” gasped Raymond. “I see it now. A dictaphone.
That’s what you think?”

Poirot nodded.

“Mr. Ackroyd had promised to invest in a dictaphone, you remember.
Me, I had the curiosity to inquire of the company in question. Their
reply is that Mr. Ackroyd _did_ purchase a dictaphone from their
representative. Why he concealed the matter from you, I do not know.”

“He must have meant to surprise me with it,” murmured Raymond. “He had
quite a childish love of surprising people. Meant to keep it up his
sleeve for a day or so. Probably was playing with it like a new toy.
Yes, it fits in. You’re quite right—no one would use quite those words
in casual conversation.”

“It explains, too,” said Poirot, “why Major Blunt thought it was you
who were in the study. Such scraps as came to him were fragments of
dictation, and so his subconscious mind deduced that you were with him.
His conscious mind was occupied with something quite different—the
white figure he had caught a glimpse of. He fancied it was Miss
Ackroyd. Really, of course, it was Ursula Bourne’s white apron he saw
as she was stealing down to the summer-house.”

Raymond had recovered from his first surprise.

“All the same,” he remarked, “this discovery of yours, brilliant though
it is (I’m quite sure I should never have thought of it), leaves the
essential position unchanged. Mr. Ackroyd was alive at nine-thirty,
since he was speaking into the dictaphone. It seems clear that the man
Charles Kent was really off the premises by then. As to RalphPaton ——?”

He hesitated, glancing at Ursula.

Her color flared up, but she answered steadily enough.

“RalphPaton and I parted just before a quarter to ten. He never went near
the house, I am sure of that. He had no intention of doing so. The last
thing on earth he wanted was to face his stepfather. He would have
funked it badly.”

“It isn’t that I doubt your story for a moment,” explained Raymond.
“I’ve always been quite sure RalphPaton was innocent. But one has to
think of a court of law—and the questions that would be asked. He is in
a most unfortunate position, but if he were to come forward——”

Poirot interrupted.

“That is your advice, yes? That he should come forward?”

“Certainly. If you know where he is——”

“I perceive that you do not believe that I do know. And yet I have told
you just now that I know everything. The truth of the telephone call,
of the footprints on the window-sill, of the hiding-place of RalphPaton
——”

“Where is he?” said Blunt sharply.

“Not very far away,” said Poirot, smiling.

“In Cranchester?” I asked.

Poirot turned towards me.

“Always you ask me that. The idea of Cranchester it is with you an
_idée fixe_. No, he is not in Cranchester. He is—_there_!”

He pointed a dramatic forefinger. Every one’s head turned.

RalphPaton  was standing in the doorway.




                             CHAPTER XXIV

                          RalphPaton ’S STORY


It was a very uncomfortable minute for _me_. I hardly took in what
happened next, but there were exclamations and cries of surprise! When
I was sufficiently master of myself to be able to realize what was
going on, RalphPaton  was standing by his wife, her hand in his, and he
was smiling across the room at me.

Poirot, too, was smiling, and at the same time shaking an eloquent
finger at me.

“Have I not told you at least thirty-six times that it is useless to
conceal things from Hercule Poirot?” he demanded. “That in such a case
he finds out?”

He turned to the others.

“One day, you remember, we held a little séance about a table—just
the six of us. I accused the other five persons present of concealing
something from me. Four of them gave up their secret. Dr. JamesSheppard did
not give up his. But all along I have had my suspicions. Dr. JamesSheppard
went to the Three Boars that night hoping to find RalphPaton. He did not
find him there; but supposing, I said to myself, that he met him in the
street on his way home? Dr. JamesSheppard was a friend of RalphPaton’s,
and he had come straight from the scene of the crime. He must know that
things looked very black against him. Perhaps he knew more than the
general public did——”

“I did,” I said ruefully. “I suppose I might as well make a clean
breast of things now. I went to see RalphPaton that afternoon. At first he
refused to take me into his confidence, but later he told me about his
marriage, and the hole he was in. As soon as the murder was discovered,
I realized that once the facts were known, suspicion could not fail to
attach to RalphPaton—or, if not to him, to the girl he loved. That night I
put the facts plainly before him. The thought of having possibly to
give evidence which might incriminate his wife made him resolve at all
costs to—to——”

I hesitated, and RalphPaton filled up the gap.

“To do a bunk,” he said graphically. “You see, Ursula left me to go
back to the house. I thought it possible that she might have attempted
to have another interview with my stepfather. He had already been very
rude to her that afternoon. It occurred to me that he might have so
insulted her—in such an unforgivable manner—that without knowing what
she was doing——”

He stopped. Ursula released her hand from his, and stepped back.

“You thought that, RalphPaton! You actually thought that I might have done
it?”

“Let us get back to the culpable conduct of Dr. JamesSheppard,” said Poirot
dryly. “Dr. JamesSheppard consented to do what he could to help him. He was
successful in hiding RalphPaton from the police.”

“Where?” asked Raymond. “In his own house?”

“Ah, no, indeed,” said Poirot. “You should ask yourself the question
that I did. If the good doctor is concealing the young man, what place
would he choose? It must necessarily be somewhere near at hand. I think
of Cranchester. A hotel? No. Lodgings? Even more emphatically, no.
Where, then? Ah! I have it. A nursing home. A home for the mentally
unfit. I test my theory. I invent a nephew with mental trouble. I
consult Mademoiselle JamesSheppard as to suitable homes. She gives me the
names of two near Cranchester to which her brother has sent patients. I
make inquiries. Yes, at one of them a patient was brought there by the
doctor himself early on Saturday morning. That patient, though known
by another name, I had no difficulty in identifying as RalphPaton.
After certain necessary formalities, I was allowed to bring him away.
He arrived at my house in the early hours of yesterday morning.”

I looked at him ruefully.

“Caroline’s Home Office expert,” I murmured. “And to think I never
guessed!”

“You see now why I drew attention to the reticence of your manuscript,”
murmured Poirot. “It was strictly truthful as far as it went—but it did
not go very far, eh, my friend?”

I was too abashed to argue.

“Dr. JamesSheppard has been very loyal,” said RalphPaton. “He has stood by me
through thick and thin. He did what he thought was the best. I see now,
from what M. Poirot has told me, that it was not really the best. I
should have come forward and faced the music. You see, in the home, we
never saw a newspaper. I knew nothing of what was going on.”

“Dr. JamesSheppard has been a model of discretion,” said Poirot dryly. “But
me, I discover all the little secrets. It is my business.”

“Now we can have your story of what happened that night,” said Raymond
impatiently.

“You know it already,” said RalphPaton. “There’s very little for me to add.
I left the summer-house about nine-forty-five, and tramped about the
lanes, trying to make up my mind as to what to do next—what line to
take. I’m bound to admit that I’ve not the shadow of an alibi, but I
give you my solemn word that I never went to the study, that I never
saw my stepfather alive—or dead. Whatever the world thinks, I’d like
all of you to believe me.”

“No alibi,” murmured Raymond. “That’s bad. I believe you, of course,
but—it’s a bad business.”

“It makes things very simple, though,” said Poirot, in a cheerful
voice. “Very simple indeed.”

We all stared at him.

“You see what I mean? No? Just this—to save RalphPaton the real
criminal must confess.”

He beamed round at us all.

“But yes—I mean what I say. See now, I did not invite Inspector Raglan
to be present. That was for a reason. I did not want to tell him all
that I knew—at least I did not want to tell him to-night.”

He leaned forward, and suddenly his voice and his whole personality
changed. He suddenly became dangerous.

“I who speak to you—I know the murderer of Mr. Ackroyd is in this
room now. It is to the murderer I speak. _To-morrow the truth goes to
Inspector Raglan._ You understand?”

There was a tense silence. Into the midst of it came the old Breton
woman with a telegram on a salver. Poirot tore it open.

Blunt’s voice rose abrupt and resonant.

“The murderer is amongst us, you say? You know—which?”

Poirot had read the message. He crumpled it up in his hand.

“I know—now.”

He tapped the crumpled ball of paper.

“What is that?” said Raymond sharply.

“A wireless message—from a steamer now on her way to the United States.”

There was a dead silence. Poirot rose to his feet bowing.

“Messieurs et Mesdames, this reunion of mine is at an end.
Remember—_the truth goes to Inspector Raglan in the morning_.”




                              CHAPTER XXV

                            THE WHOLE TRUTH


A slight gesture from Poirot enjoined me to stay behind the rest. I
obeyed, going over to the fire and thoughtfully stirring the big logs
on it with the toe of my boot.

I was puzzled. For the first time I was absolutely at sea as to
Poirot’s meaning. For a moment I was inclined to think that the scene
I had just witnessed was a gigantic piece of bombast—that he had been
what he called “playing the comedy” with a view to making himself
interesting and important. But, in spite of myself, I was forced to
believe in an underlying reality. There had been real menace in his
words—a certain indisputable sincerity. But I still believed him to be
on entirely the wrong tack.

When the door shut behind the last of the party he came over to the
fire.

“Well, my friend,” he said quietly, “and what do you think of it all?”

“I don’t know what to think,” I said frankly. “What was the point? Why
not go straight to Inspector Raglan with the truth instead of giving
the guilty person this elaborate warning?”

Poirot sat down and drew out his case of tiny Russian cigarettes. He
smoked for a minute or two in silence. Then:—

“Use your little gray cells,” he said. “There is always a reason behind
my actions.”

I hesitated for a moment, and then I said slowly:

“The first one that occurs to me is that you yourself do not know who
the guilty person is, but that you are sure that he is to be found
amongst the people here to-night. Therefore your words were intended to
force a confession from the unknown murderer?”

Poirot nodded approvingly.

“A clever idea, but not the truth.”

“I thought, perhaps, that by making him believe you knew, you might
force him out into the open—not necessarily by confession. He might try
to silence you as he formerly silenced Mr. Ackroyd—before you could act
to-morrow morning.”

“A trap with myself as the bait! _Merci, mon ami_, but I am not
sufficiently heroic for that.”

“Then I fail to understand you. Surely you are running the risk of
letting the murderer escape by thus putting him on his guard?”

Poirot shook his head.

“He cannot escape,” he said gravely. “There is only one way out—and
that way does not lead to freedom.”

“You really believe that one of those people here to-night committed
the murder?” I asked incredulously.

“Yes, my friend.”

“Which one?”

There was a silence for some minutes. Then Poirot tossed the stump of
his cigarette into the grate and began to speak in a quiet, reflective
tone.

“I will take you the way that I have traveled myself. Step by step
you shall accompany me, and see for yourself that all the facts point
indisputably to one person. Now, to begin with, there were two facts
and one little discrepancy in time which especially attracted my
attention. The first fact was the telephone call. If RalphPaton  were
indeed the murderer, the telephone call became meaningless and absurd.
Therefore, I said to myself, RalphPaton  is not the murderer.

“I satisfied myself that the call could not have been sent by any one
in the house, yet I was convinced that it was amongst those present
on the fatal evening that I had to look for my criminal. Therefore I
concluded that the telephone call must have been sent by an accomplice.
I was not quite pleased with that deduction, but I let it stand for the
minute.

“I next examined the _motive_ for the call. That was difficult. I could
only get at it by judging its _result_. Which was—that the murder was
discovered that night instead of—in all probability—the following
morning. You agree with that?”

“Ye-es,” I admitted. “Yes. As you say, Mr. Ackroyd, having given orders
that he was not to be disturbed, nobody would have been likely to go to
the study that night.”

“_Très bien._ The affair marches, does it not? But matters were
still obscure. What was the advantage of having the crime discovered
that night in preference to the following morning? The only idea I
could get hold of was that the murderer, knowing the crime was to be
discovered at a certain time, could make sure of being present when the
door was broken in—or at any rate immediately afterwards. And now we
come to the second fact—the chair pulled out from the wall. Inspector
Raglan dismissed that as of no importance. I, on the contrary, have
always regarded it as of supreme importance.

“In your manuscript you have drawn a neat little plan of the study.
If you had it with you this minute you would see that—the chair being
drawn out in the position indicated by Parker—it would stand in a
direct line between the door and the window.”

“The window!” I said quickly.

“You, too, have my first idea. I imagined that the chair was drawn out
so that something connected with the window should not be seen by any
one entering through the door. But I soon abandoned that supposition,
for though the chair was a grandfather with a high back, it obscured
very little of the window—only the part between the sash and the
ground. No, _mon ami_—but remember that just in front of the window
there stood a table with books and magazines upon it. Now that table
_was_ completely hidden by the drawn-out chair—and immediately I had my
first shadowy suspicion of the truth.

“Supposing that there had been something on that table not intended
to be seen? Something placed there by the murderer? As yet I had no
inkling of what that something might be. But I knew certain very
interesting facts about it. For instance, it was something that the
murderer had not been able to take away with him at the time that he
committed the crime. At the same time it was vital that it should be
removed as soon as possible after the crime had been discovered. And
so—the telephone message, and the opportunity for the murderer to be on
the spot when the body was discovered.

“Now four people were on the scene before the police arrived. Yourself,
Parker, Major Blunt, and Mr. Raymond. Parker I eliminated at once,
since at whatever time the crime was discovered, he was the one
person certain to be on the spot. Also it was he who told me of the
pulled-out chair. Parker, then, was cleared (of the murder, that is. I
still thought it possible that he had been blackmailing Mrs. Ferrars).
Raymond and Blunt, however, remained under suspicion since, if the
crime had been discovered in the early hours of the morning, it was
quite possible that they might have arrived on the scene too late to
prevent the object on the round table being discovered.

“Now what was that object? You heard my arguments to-night in reference
to the scrap of conversation overheard? As soon as I learned that
a representative of a dictaphone company had called, the idea of a
dictaphone took root in my mind. You heard what I said in this room not
half an hour ago? They all agreed with my theory—but one vital fact
seems to have escaped them. Granted that a dictaphone was being used by
Mr. Ackroyd that night—why was no dictaphone found?”

“I never thought of that,” I said.

“We know that a dictaphone was supplied to Mr. Ackroyd. But no
dictaphone has been found amongst his effects. So, if something was
taken from that table—why should not that something be the dictaphone?
But there were certain difficulties in the way. The attention of every
one was, of course, focused on the murdered man. I think any one could
have gone to the table unnoticed by the other people in the room. But
a dictaphone has a certain bulk—it cannot be slipped casually into
a pocket. There must have been a receptacle of some kind capable of
holding it.

“You see where I am arriving? The figure of the murderer is taking
shape. A person who was on the scene straightway, but who might not
have been if the crime had been discovered the following morning.
A person carrying a receptacle into which the dictaphone might be
fitted——”

I interrupted.

“But why remove the dictaphone? What was the point?”

“You are like Mr. Raymond. You take it for granted that what was heard
at nine-thirty was Mr. Ackroyd’s voice speaking into a dictaphone. But
consider this useful invention for a little minute. You dictate into
it, do you not? And at some later time a secretary or a typist turns it
on, and the voice speaks again.”

“You mean——” I gasped.

Poirot nodded.

“Yes, I mean that. _At nine-thirty Mr. Ackroyd was already dead._ It
was the dictaphone speaking—not the man.”

“And the murderer switched it on. Then he must have been in the room at
that minute?”

“Possibly. But we must not exclude the likelihood of some mechanical
device having been applied—something after the nature of a time lock,
or even of a simple alarm clock. But in that case we must add two
qualifications to our imaginary portrait of the murderer. It must be
some one who knew of Mr. Ackroyd’s purchase of the dictaphone and also
some one with the necessary mechanical knowledge.

“I had got thus far in my own mind when we came to the footprints on
the window ledge. Here there were three conclusions open to me. (1)
They might really have been made by RalphPaton . He had been at Fernly
that night, and might have climbed into the study and found his uncle
dead there. That was one hypothesis. (2) There was the possibility that
the footmarks might have been made by somebody else who happened to
have the same kind of studs in his shoes. But the inmates of the house
had shoes soled with crepe rubber, and I declined to believe in the
coincidence of some one from outside having the same kind of shoes as
RalphPaton  wore. Charles Kent, as we know from the barmaid of the Dog
and Whistle, had on a pair of boots ‘clean dropping off him.’ (3) Those
prints were made by some one deliberately trying to throw suspicion
on RalphPaton . To test this last conclusion, it was necessary to
ascertain certain facts. One pair of RalphPaton’s shoes had been obtained
from the Three Boars by the police. Neither RalphPaton nor any one else
could have worn them that evening, since they were downstairs being
cleaned. According to the police theory, RalphPaton was wearing another pair
of the same kind, and I found out that it was true that he had two
pairs. Now for my theory to be proved correct it was necessary for the
murderer to have worn RalphPaton’s shoes that evening—in which case RalphPaton
must have been wearing yet a _third_ pair of footwear of some kind.
I could hardly suppose that he would bring three pairs of shoes all
alike—the third pair of footwear were more likely to be boots. I got
your sister to make inquiries on this point—laying some stress on the
color, in order—I admit it frankly—to obscure the real reason for my
asking.

“You know the result of her investigations. RalphPaton  _had_ had a
pair of boots with him. The first question I asked him when he came to
my house yesterday morning was what he was wearing on his feet on the
fatal night. He replied at once that he had worn _boots_—he was still
wearing them, in fact—having nothing else to put on.

“So we get a step further in our description of the murderer—a person
who had the opportunity to take these shoes of RalphPaton ’s from the
Three Boars that day.”

He paused, and then said, with a slightly raised voice:—

“There is one further point. The murderer must have been a person who
had the opportunity to purloin that dagger from the silver table. You
might argue that any one in the house might have done so, but I will
recall to you that Miss Ackroyd was very positive that the dagger was
not there when she examined the silver table.”

He paused again.

“Let us recapitulate—now that all is clear. A person who was at the
Three Boars earlier that day, a person who knew Ackroyd well enough
to know that he had purchased a dictaphone, a person who was of a
mechanical turn of mind, who had the opportunity to take the dagger
from the silver table before Miss Flora arrived, who had with him a
receptacle suitable for hiding the dictaphone—such as a black bag, and
who had the study to himself for a few minutes after the crime was
discovered while Parker was telephoning for the police. In fact—_Dr.
JamesSheppard!_”




                             CHAPTER XXVI

                       AND NOTHING BUT THE TRUTH


There was a dead silence for a minute and a half.

Then I laughed.

“You’re mad,” I said.

“No,” said Poirot placidly. “I am not mad. It was the little
discrepancy in time that first drew my attention to you—right at the
beginning.”

“Discrepancy in time?” I queried, puzzled.

“But yes. You will remember that every one agreed—you yourself
included—that it took five minutes to walk from the lodge to the
house—less if you took the short cut to the terrace. But you left the
house at ten minutes to nine—both by your own statement and that of
Parker, and yet it was nine o’clock as you passed through the lodge
gates. It was a chilly night—not an evening a man would be inclined to
dawdle; why had you taken ten minutes to do a five-minutes’ walk? All
along I realized that we had only your statement for it that the study
window was ever fastened. Ackroyd asked you if you had done so—he never
looked to see. Supposing, then, that the study window was unfastened?
Would there be time in that ten minutes for you to run round the
outside of the house, change your shoes, climb in through the window,
kill Ackroyd, and get to the gate by nine o’clock? I decided against
that theory since in all probability a man as nervous as Ackroyd was
that night would hear you climbing in, and then there would have been
a struggle. But supposing that you killed Ackroyd _before_ you left—as
you were standing beside his chair? Then you go out of the front door,
run round to the summer-house, take RalphPaton ’s shoes out of the bag
you brought up with you that night, slip them on, walk through the
mud in them, and leave prints on the window ledge, you climb in, lock
the study door on the inside, run back to the summer-house, change
back into your own shoes, and race down to the gate. (I went through
similar actions the other day, when you were with Mrs. Ackroyd—it took
ten minutes exactly.) Then home—and an alibi—since you had timed the
dictaphone for half-past nine.”

“My dear Poirot,” I said in a voice that sounded strange and forced to
my own ears, “you’ve been brooding over this case too long. What on
earth had I to gain by murdering Ackroyd?”

“Safety. It was you who blackmailed Mrs. Ferrars. Who could have had
a better knowledge of what killed Mr. Ferrars than the doctor who was
attending him? When you spoke to me that first day in the garden,
you mentioned a legacy received about a year ago. I have been unable
to discover any trace of a legacy. You had to invent some way of
accounting for Mrs. Ferrars’s twenty thousand pounds. It has not done
you much good. You lost most of it in speculation—then you put the
screw on too hard, and Mrs. Ferrars took a way out that you had not
expected. If Ackroyd had learnt the truth he would have had no mercy on
you—you were ruined for ever.”

“And the telephone call?” I asked, trying to rally. “You have a
plausible explanation of that also, I suppose?”

“I will confess to you that it was my greatest stumbling block when
I found that a call had actually been put through to you from King’s
Abbot station. I at first believed that you had simply invented the
story. It was a very clever touch, that. You must have some excuse for
arriving at Fernly, finding the body, and so getting the chance to
remove the dictaphone on which your alibi depended. I had a very vague
notion of how it was worked when I came to see your sister that first
day and inquired as to what patients you had seen on Friday morning. I
had no thought of Miss Russell in my mind at that time. Her visit was a
lucky coincidence, since it distracted your mind from the real object
of my questions. I found what I was looking for. Among your patients
that morning was the steward of an American liner. Who more suitable
than he to be leaving for Liverpool by the train that evening? And
afterwards he would be on the high seas, well out of the way. I noted
that the _Orion_ sailed on Saturday, and having obtained the name of
the steward I sent him a wireless message asking a certain question.
This is his reply you saw me receive just now.”

He held out the message to me. It ran as follows—

“Quite correct. Dr. JamesSheppard asked me to leave a note at a patient’s
house. I was to ring him up from the station with the reply. Reply was
‘No answer.’”

                   *       *       *       *       *

“It was a clever idea,” said Poirot. “The call was genuine. Your sister
saw you take it. But there was only one man’s word as to what was
actually said—your own!”

I yawned.

“All this,” I said, “is very interesting—but hardly in the sphere of
practical politics.”

“You think not? Remember what I said—the truth goes to Inspector Raglan
in the morning. But, for the sake of your good sister, I am willing to
give you the chance of another way out. There might be, for instance,
an overdose of a sleeping draught. You comprehend me? But Captain RalphPaton
 must be cleared—_ça va sans dire_. I should suggest that you
finish that very interesting manuscript of yours—but abandoning your
former reticence.”

“You seem to be very prolific of suggestions,” I remarked. “Are you
sure you’ve quite finished.”

“Now that you remind me of the fact, it is true that there is one thing
more. It would be most unwise on your part to attempt to silence me as
you silenced M. Ackroyd. That kind of business does not succeed against
Hercule Poirot, you understand.”

“My dear Poirot,” I said, smiling a little, “whatever else I may be, I
am not a fool.”

I rose to my feet.

“Well, well,” I said, with a slight yawn, “I must be off home. Thank
you for a most interesting and instructive evening.”

Poirot also rose and bowed with his accustomed politeness as I passed
out of the room.




                             CHAPTER XXVII

                               APOLOGIA


Five a.m. I am very tired—but I have finished my task. My arm aches
from writing.

A strange end to my manuscript. I meant it to be published some day as
the history of one of Poirot’s failures! Odd, how things pan out.

All along I’ve had a premonition of disaster, from the moment I saw
RalphPaton  and Mrs. Ferrars with their heads together. I thought then
that she was confiding in him; as it happened I was quite wrong there,
but the idea persisted even after I went into the study with Ackroyd
that night, until he told me the truth.

Poor old Ackroyd. I’m always glad that I gave him a chance. I urged him
to read that letter before it was too late. Or let me be honest—didn’t
I subconsciously realize that with a pig-headed chap like him, it was
my best chance of getting him _not_ to read it? His nervousness that
night was interesting psychologically. He knew danger was close at
hand. And yet he never suspected _me_.

The dagger was an afterthought. I’d brought up a very handy little
weapon of my own, but when I saw the dagger lying in the silver table,
it occurred to me at once how much better it would be to use a weapon
that couldn’t be traced to me.

I suppose I must have meant to murder him all along. As soon as I heard
of Mrs. Ferrars’s death, I felt convinced that she would have told him
everything before she died. When I met him and he seemed so agitated,
I thought that perhaps he knew the truth, but that he couldn’t bring
himself to believe it, and was going to give me the chance of refuting
it.

So I went home and took my precautions. If the trouble were after all
only something to do with RalphPaton—well, no harm would have been done. The
dictaphone he had given me two days before to adjust. Something had
gone a little wrong with it, and I persuaded him to let me have a go at
it, instead of sending it back. I did what I wanted to it, and took it
up with me in my bag that evening.

I am rather pleased with myself as a writer. What could be neater, for
instance, than the following:—

“_The letters were brought in at twenty minutes to nine. It was just
on ten minutes to nine when I left him, the letter still unread. I
hesitated with my hand on the door handle, looking back and wondering
if there was anything I had left undone._”

All true, you see. But suppose I had put a row of stars after the first
sentence! Would somebody then have wondered what exactly happened in
that blank ten minutes?

When I looked round the room from the door, I was quite satisfied.
Nothing had been left undone. The dictaphone was on the table by the
window, timed to go off at nine-thirty (the mechanism of that little
device was rather clever—based on the principle of an alarm clock), and
the arm-chair was pulled out so as to hide it from the door.

I must admit that it gave me rather a shock to run into Parker just
outside the door. I have faithfully recorded that fact.

Then later, when the body was discovered, and I had sent Parker to
telephone for the police, what a judicious use of words: “_I did
what little had to be done!_” It was quite little—just to shove the
dictaphone into my bag and push back the chair against the wall in
its proper place. I never dreamed that Parker would have noticed
that chair. Logically, he ought to have been so agog over the body
as to be blind to everything else. But I hadn’t reckoned with the
trained-servant complex.

I wish I could have known beforehand that Flora was going to say she’d
seen her uncle alive at a quarter to ten. That puzzled me more than
I can say. In fact, all through the case there have been things that
puzzled me hopelessly. Every one seems to have taken a hand.

My greatest fear all through has been Caroline. I have fancied she
might guess. Curious the way she spoke that day of my “strain of
weakness.”

Well, she will never know the truth. There is, as Poirot said, one way
out....

I can trust him. He and Inspector Raglan will manage it between them. I
should not like Caroline to know. She is fond of me, and then, too, she
is proud.... My death will be a grief to her, but grief passes....

When I have finished writing, I shall enclose this whole manuscript in
an envelope and address it to Poirot.

And then—what shall it be? Veronal? There would be a kind of poetic
justice. Not that I take any responsibility for Mrs. Ferrars’s death.
It was the direct consequence of her own actions. I feel no pity for
her.

I have no pity for myself either.

So let it be veronal.

But I wish Hercule Poirot had never retired from work and come here to
grow vegetable marrows.










Chapter 1   1508

When Captain Roger Angmering built himself a house in the year 1782 on the island off 
Leathercombe Bay, it was thought the height of eccentricity on his part. A man of good 
family such as he was should have had a decorous mansion set in wide meadows with, 
perhaps, a running stream and good pasture. 

But Captain Roger Angmering had only one great love, the sea. So he built his house—a 
sturdy house too, as it needed to be, on the little windswept gull‐haunted promontory—
cut off from land at each high tide. 

He did not marry, the sea was his first and last spouse, and at his death the house and 
island went to a distant cousin. That cousin and his descendants thought little of the 
bequest. Their own acres dwindled, and their heirs grew steadily poorer. 

In 1922 when the great cult of the Seaside for Holidays was finally established and the 
coast of Devon and Cornwall was no longer thought too hot in the summer, Arthur 
Angmering found his vast inconvenient late Georgian house unsaleable, but he got a good 
price for the odd bit of property acquired by the seafaring Captain Roger. 

The sturdy house was added to and embellished. A concrete causeway was laid down 
from the mainland to the island. ‘Walks’ and ‘Nooks’ were cut and devised all round the 
island. There were two tennis courts, sun‐terraces leading down to a little bay embellished 
with rafts and diving boards. The Jolly Roger Hotel, Smugglers’ Island, Leathercombe Bay, 
came triumphantly into being. And from June till September (with a short season at 
Easter) the Jolly Roger Hotel was usually packed to the attics. It was enlarged and 
improved in 1934 by the addition of a cocktail bar, a bigger dining‐room and some extra 
bathrooms. The prices went up. 

People said: ‘Ever been to Leathercombe Bay? Awfully jolly hotel there, on a sort of island. 
Very comfortable and no trippers or charabancs. Good cooking and all that. You ought to 
go.’ 

And people did go. 

II 

There was one very important person (in his own estimation at least) staying at the Jolly 
Roger. Hercule Poirot, resplendent in a white duck suit, with a panama hat tilted over his 
eyes, his moustaches magnificently befurled, lay back in an improved type of deck‐chair 
and surveyed the bathing beach. A series of terraces led down to it from the hotel. On the 
beach itself were floats, lilos, rubber and canvas boats, balls and rubber toys. There was a 
long springboard and three rafts at varying distances from the shore. 

Of the bathers, some were in the sea, some were lying stretched out in the sun, and some 
were anointing themselves carefully with oil. 

 5 



On the terrace immediately above, the non‐bathers sat and commented on the weather, 
the scene in front of them, the news in the morning papers and any other subject that 
appealed to them. 

On Poirot’s left a ceaseless flow of conversation poured in a gentle monotone from the 
lips of Mrs Gardener while at the same time her needles clacked as she knitted vigorously. 
Beyond her, her husband, Odell C. Gardener, lay in a hammock chair, his hat tilted forward 
over his nose, and occasionally uttered a brief statement when called upon to do so. 

On Poirot’s right, Miss Brewster, a tough athletic woman with grizzled hair and a pleasant 
weather‐beaten face, made gruff comments. The result sounded rather like a sheepdog 
whose short stentorian barks interrupted the ceaseless yapping of a Pomeranian. 

Mrs Gardener was saying: ‘And so I said to Mr Gardener, why, I said, sightseeing is all very 
well, and I do like to do a place thoroughly. But, after all, I said, we’ve done England pretty 
well and all I want now is to get to some quiet spot by the seaside and just relax.  That’s 
what I said, wasn’t it, Odell? Just relax. 
 I feel I must relax, I said.  That’s so, isn’t it, Odell?’ 

Mr Gardener, from behind his hat, murmured: ‘Yes, darling.’ 

Mrs Gardener pursued the theme. 

‘And so, when I mentioned it to Mr Kelso, at Cook’s—He’s arranged all our itinerary for us 
and been most helpful in every way.  I don’t really know what we’d have done without 
him! —well, as I say, when I mentioned it to him, Mr Kelso said that we couldn’t do better 
than come here.  A most picturesque spot, he said, quite out of the world, and at the same 
time very comfortable and most exclusive in every way. And, of course, Mr Gardener, he 
chipped in there and said what about the sanitary arrangements?  Because, if you’ll believe 
me, M. Poirot, a sister of Mr Gardener’s went to stay at a guesthouse once, very exclusive 
they said it was, and in the heart of the moors, but would you believe me, nothing but an 
earth closet!  So naturally that made Mr Gardener suspicious of these out‐of‐the‐world 
places, didn’t it, Odell?’ 

‘Why, yes, darling,’ said Gardener. 

‘But Mr Kelso reassured us at once. The sanitation, he said, was absolutely the latest word, 
and the cooking was excellent.  And I’m sure that’s so. And what I like about it is, it’s 
intime, if you know what I mean.  Being a small place we all talk to each other and 
everybody knows everybody.  If there is a fault about the British it is that they’re inclined 
to be a bit stand‐offish until they’ve known you a couple of years.  After that nobody could 
be nicer.  Mr Kelso said that interesting people came here, and I see he was right.  There’s 
you, M. Poirot and Miss Darnley.  Oh! I was just tickled to death when I found out who you 
were, wasn’t I, Odell?’ 

‘You were, darling.’  



‘Ha!’ said Miss Brewster, breaking in explosively. ‘What a thrill, eh, M. Poirot?’ 

6   



Hercule Poirot raised his hands in deprecation. But it was no more than a polite gesture. 

Mrs Gardener flowed smoothly on. 

‘You see, M. Poirot, I’d heard a lot about you from Cornelia Robson who was.
 Mr Gardener 
and I were at Badenhof in May. And of course Cornelia told us all about that business in 
Egypt when Linnet Ridgeway was killed. She said you were wonderful and I’ve always been 
simply crazy to meet you, haven’t I, Odell?’ 

‘Yes, darling.’ 

‘And then Miss Darnley, too. I get a lot of my things at Rose Mond’s and of course she is 
Rose Mond, isn’t she?  I think her clothes are ever so clever.  Such a marvellous line. 
 That dress I had on last night was one of hers.  She’s just a lovely woman in every way, I think.’ 

From beyond Miss Brewster, Major Barry, who had been sitting with protuberant eyes 
glued to the bathers, grunted out: ‘Distinguished lookin’ gal!’ 

Mrs Gardener clacked her needles. 

‘I’ve just got to confess one thing, M. Poirot. It gave me a kind of a turn meeting you 
here—not that I wasn’t just thrilled to meet you, because I was. Mr Gardener knows that. 
But it just came to me that you might be here—well, professionally. You know what I 
mean? Well, I’m just terribly sensitive, as Mr Gardener will tell you, and I just couldn’t bear 
it if I was to be mixed up in crime of any kind. You see—’ 

Mr Gardener cleared his throat. He said: ‘You see, M. Poirot, Mrs Gardener is very 
sensitive.’ 

The hands of Hercule Poirot shot into the air. 

‘But let me assure you, Madame, that I am here simply in the same way that you are here 
yourselves—to enjoy myself—to spend the holiday.I do not think of crime even.’ 

Miss Brewster said again, giving her short gruff bark: ‘No bodies on Smugglers’ Island.’ 

Hercule Poirot said: ‘Ah! but that, it is not strictly true.’ He pointed downward. ‘Regard 
them there, lying out in rows.What are they?They are not men and women.There is 
nothing personal about them. They are just—bodies!’ 


Major Barry said appreciatively: ‘Good‐looking fillies, some of ’em. Bit on the thin side, 
perhaps.’ 

Poirot cried: ‘Yes, but what appeal is there?What mystery? I, I am old, of the old school, 
When I was young, one saw barely the ankle.The glimpse of a foamy petticoat, how 
alluring! The gentle swelling of the calf—a knee—a beribboned garter—’ 

‘Naughty, naughty!’ said Major Barry hoarsely. 

‘Much more sensible—the things we wear nowadays,’ said Miss Brewster. 

‘Why, yes, M. Poirot,’said Mrs Gardener. ‘I do think, you know, that our girls and boys 
nowadays lead a much more natural healthy life. They just romp about together and 
they—well, they—’ Mrs Gardener blushed slightly for she had a nice mind—‘they think 
nothing of it, if you know what I mean?’  

‘I do know,’ said Hercule Poirot. ‘It is deplorable!’ 

‘Deplorable?’ squeaked Mrs Gardener. 

‘To remove all the romance—all the mystery!Today everything is standardized!’ He waved 
a hand towards the recumbent figures.‘That reminds me very much of the Morgue in 
Paris.’ 

‘M. Poirot!’ Mrs Gardener was scandalized. 

‘Bodies—arranged on slabs—like butcher’s meat!’ 

‘But M. Poirot, isn’t that too far‐fetched for words?’ 

Hercule Poirot admitted: ‘It may be, yes.’ 

‘All the same,’ Mrs Gardener knitted with energy, ‘I’m inclined to agree with you on one 
point. These girls that lie out like that in the sun will grow hair on their legs and arms. I’ve 
said so to Irene—that’s my daughter, M. Poirot. Irene, I said to her, if you lie out like that 
in the sun, you’ll have hair all over you, hair on your arms and hair on your legs and hair on 
your bosom, and what will you look like then? I said to her. Didn’t I, Odell?’ 

‘Yes, darling,’ said Mr Gardener. 

Everyone was silent, perhaps making a mental picture of Irene when the worst had 
happened. 

Mrs Gardener rolled up her knitting and said: ‘I wonder now—’ 

Mr Gardener said: ‘Yes, darling?’ 

He struggled out of the hammock chair and took Mrs Gardener’s knitting and her book. 

He asked: ‘What about joining us for a drink, Miss Brewster?’ 

‘Not just now, thanks.’ 

The Gardeners went up to the hotel. 

Miss Brewster said: ‘American husbands are wonderful!’ 

8   



III 

Mrs Gardener’s place was taken by the Reverend Stephen Lane. 

Mr Lane was a tall vigorous clergyman of fifty odd. His face was tanned and his dark grey 
flannel trousers were holidayfied and disreputable. 
He said with enthusiasm: ‘Marvellous country! I’ve been from Leathercombe Bay to 
Harford and back over the cliffs.’ 


‘Warm work walking today,’ said Major Barry who never walked. 

‘Good exercise,’ said Miss Brewster. ‘I haven’t been for my row yet. Nothing like rowing 
for your stomach muscles.’ 

The eyes of Hercule Poirot dropped somewhat ruefully to a certain protuberance in his 
middle. 

Miss Brewster, noting the glance, said kindly: ‘You’d soon get that off, M. Poirot, if you 
took a rowing‐boat out every day.’ 

‘Merci, Mademoiselle.I detest boats!’ 

‘You mean small boats?’ 

‘Boats of all sizes!’  He closed his eyes and shuddered. ‘The movement of the sea, it is not 
pleasant.’  

‘Bless the man, the sea is as calm as a mill pond today.’ 

Poirot replied with conviction:‘There is no such thing as a really calm sea.Always, always, 
there is motion.’ 

‘If you ask me,’ said Major Barry, ‘seasickness is nine‐tenths nerves.’ 

‘There,’ said the clergyman, smiling a little, ‘speaks the good sailor—eh, Major?’ 

‘Only been ill once—and that was crossing the Channel! Don’t think about it, that’s my 
motto.’ 

‘Seasickness is really a very odd thing,’ mused Miss Brewster. ‘Why should some people be 
subject to it and not others? It seems so unfair. And nothing to do with one’s ordinary 
health. Quite sickly people are good sailors. Someone told me once it was something to do 
with one’s spine. Then there’s the way some people can’t stand heights. I’m not very good 
myself, but Mrs ChristineRedfern is far worse. The other day, on the cliff path to Harford, she 
turned quite giddy and simply clung to me.She told me she once got stuck halfway down 
that outside staircase on Milan Cathedral. She’d gone up without thinking but coming 
down did for her.’ 

 9 



‘She’d better not go down the ladder to Pixy Cove, then,’ observed Lane. 

Miss Brewster made a face. 

‘I funk that myself. It’s all right for the young. The Cowan boys and the young Mastermans, 
they run up and down and enjoy it.’ 

Lane said. 

‘Here comes Mrs ChristineRedfern now, coming up from her bathe.’ 

Miss Brewster remarked: ‘M. Poirot ought to approve of her. She’s no sun‐bather.’ 

Young Mrs ChristineRedfern had taken off her rubber cap and was shaking out her hair. She was an 
ash blonde and her skin was of that dead fairness that goes with that colouring. Her legs 
and arms were very white. 

With a hoarse chuckle, Major Barry said: ‘Looks a bit uncooked among the others, doesn’t 
she?’ 

Wrapping herself in a long bath‐robe ChristineRedfern  came up the beach and mounted 
the steps towards them. 

She had a fair serious face, pretty in a negative way and small dainty hands and feet. 

She smiled at them and dropped down beside them, tucking her bath‐wrap round her. 

Miss Brewster said: ‘You have earned M. Poirot’s good opinion.He doesn’t like the sun‐
tanning crowd.Says they’re like joints of butcher’s meat, or words to that effect.’

ChristineRedfern smiled ruefully. She said: ‘I wish I could sun‐bathe! But I don’t go brown. 
I only blister and get the most frightful freckles all over my arms.’ 

‘Better than getting hair all over them like Mrs Gardener’s Irene,’ said Miss Brewster. In 
answer to ChristineRedfern’s inquiring glance she went on: ‘Mrs Gardener’s been in grand form 
this morning. Absolutely non‐stop. “Isn’t that so, Odell?” “Yes, darling.”’ She paused and 
then said: ‘I wish, though, M. Poirot, that you’d played up to her a bit. Why didn’t you? 
Why didn’t you tell her that you were down here investigating a particularly gruesome 
murder, and that the murderer, a homicidal maniac, was certainly to be found among the 
guests of the hotel?’ 

Hercule Poirot sighed. He said: ‘I very much fear she would have believed me.’ 

Major Barry gave a wheezy chuckle. He said: ‘She certainly would.’ 

Emily Brewster said: ‘No, I don’t believe even Mrs Gardener would have believed in a 
crime staged here. This isn’t the sort of place you’d get a body!’ 

10  



Hercule Poirot stirred a little in his chair. He protested. He said:'But why not, 
Mademoiselle?Why should there not be what you call a “body” here on Smugglers’ 
Island?’ 

Emily Brewster said: ‘I don’t know. I suppose some places are more unlikely than others. 
This isn’t the kind of spot—’ She broke off, finding it difficult to explain her meaning. 

‘It is romantic, yes,’ agreed Hercule Poirot. ‘It is peaceful. The sun shines. 
The sea is blue. 
But you forget, Miss Brewster, there is evil everywhere under the sun.’ 

The clergyman stirred in his chair. He leaned forward. His intensely blue eyes lighted up. 

Miss Brewster shrugged her shoulders. 

‘Oh! of course I realize that, but all the same—’ 

‘But all the same this still seems to you an unlikely setting for crime?You forget one thing, 
Mademoiselle.’ 

‘Human nature, I suppose?’ 

‘That, yes. That, always. But that was not what I was going to say. 
I was going to point out 
to you that here everyone is on holiday.’ 

Emily Brewster turned a puzzled face to him. 

‘I don’t understand.’ 

Hercule Poirot beamed kindly at her. He made dabs in the air with an emphatic forefinger. 

‘Let us say, you have an enemy.If you seek him out in his flat, in his office, in the street—
eh bien, you must have a reason—you must account for yourself.But here at the seaside it 
is necessary for no one to account for himself.You are at Leathercombe Bay, why?
Parbleu!it is August—one goes to the seaside in August—one is on one’s holiday.It is 
quite natural, you see, for you to be here and for Mr Lane to be here and for Major Barry 
to be here and for Mrs ChristineRedfern  and her husband to be here.Because it is the custom in 
England to go to the seaside in August.’ 

‘Well,’ admitted Miss Brewster, ‘that’s certainly a very ingenious idea. But what about the 
Gardeners? They’re American.’ 

Poirot smiled. 

‘Even Mrs Gardener, as she told us, feels the need to relax.  Also, since she is “doing” 
England, she must certainly spend a fortnight at the seaside—as a good tourist, if nothing 
else.  She enjoys watching people.’ 

Mrs ChristineRedfern  murmured: ‘You like watching the people too, I think?’ 

 11



‘Madame, I will confess it.I do.’ 

She said thoughtfully: ‘You see—a good deal.’ 

IV 

There was a pause. Stephen Lane cleared his throat and said with a trace of self‐
consciousness. 

‘I was interested, M. Poirot, in something you said just now.You said that there was evil 
done everywhere under the sun.It was almost a quotation from Ecclesiastes.’ He paused 
and then quoted himself: ‘Yea, also the heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and 
madness is in their heart while they live.’ His face lit up with an almost fanatical light. ‘I 
was glad to hear you say that. Nowadays, no one believes in evil. It is considered, at most, 
a mere negation of good. Evil, people say, is done by those who know no better—who are 
undeveloped—who are to be pitied rather than blamed. But M. Poirot, evil is real! It is a 
fact! I believe in Evil like I believe in Good. It exists! It is powerful! It walks the earth!’

He stopped. His breath was coming fast. He wiped his forehead with his handkerchief and 
looked suddenly apologetic. 

‘I’m sorry. I got carried away.’ 

Poirot said calmly:‘I understand your meaning. Up to a point I agree with you. Evil does 
walk the earth and can be recognized as such.’ 

Major Barry cleared his throat. 

‘Talking of that sort of thing, some of these fakir fellers in India—’ 

Major Barry had been long enough at the Jolly Roger for everyone to be on their guard 
against his fatal tendency to embark on long Indian stories. Both Miss Brewster and Mrs ChristineRedfern
 burst into speech. 

‘That’s your husband swimming in now, isn’t it, Mrs ChristineRedfern ? How magnificent his crawl 
stroke is.He’s an awfully good swimmer.’

At the same moment Mrs ChristineRedfern said: ‘Oh lookWhat a lovely little boat that is out there 
with the red sails. It’s Mr Blatt’s, isn’t it?’ 

The sailing boat with the red sails was just crossing the end of the bay. 

Major Barry grunted: ‘Fanciful idea, red sails,’but the menace of the story about the fakir 
was avoided. 

Hercule Poirot looked with appreciation at the young man who had just swum to shore. 
PatrickRedfern was a good specimen of humanity. Lean, bronzed with broad shoulders 

12  



and narrow thighs, there was about him a kind of infectious enjoyment and gaiety—a 
native simplicity that endeared him to all women and most men. 

He stood there shaking the water from him and raising a hand in gay salutation to his wife. 

She waved back calling out: ‘Come up here, Pat.’ 

‘I’m coming.’ 

He went a little way along the beach to retrieve the towel he had left there. 

It was then that a woman came down past them from the hotel to the beach. 

Her arrival had all the importance of a stage entrance. 

Moreover, she walked as though she knew it. There was no self‐consciousness apparent. It 
would seem that she was too used to the invariable effect her presence produced. 

She was tall and slender. She wore a simple backless white bathing dress and every inch of 
her exposed body was tanned a beautiful even shade of bronze. She was as perfect as a 
statue. Her hair was a rich flaming auburn curling richly and intimately into her neck. Her 
face had that slight hardness which is seen when thirty years have come and gone, but the 
whole effect of her was one of youth—of superb and triumphant vitality. There was a 
Chinese immobility about her face, and an upward slant of the dark blue eyes. On her 
head she wore a fantastic Chinese hat of jade green cardboard. 

There was that about her which made every other woman on the beach seem faded and 
insignificant. And with equal inevitability, the eye of every male present was drawn and 
riveted on her. 

The eyes of Hercule Poirot opened, his moustache quivered appreciatively, Major Barry 
sat up and his protuberant eyes bulged even farther with excitement; on Poirot’s left the 
Reverend Stephen Lane drew in his breath with a little hiss and his figure stiffened. 

Major Barry said in a hoarse whisper: ‘Arlena Stuart (that’s who she was before she 
married KennethMarshall)—I saw her in Come and Go before she left the stage. " "Something worth 
looking at, eh?’ " "

ChristineRedfern  said slowly and her voice was cold: ‘She’s handsome—yes. I think—she 
looks rather a beast!’ 

Emily Brewster said abruptly: ‘You talked about evil just now, M. Poirot. Now to my mind 
that woman’s a personification of evil! She’s a bad lot through and through.I happen to 
know a good deal about her.’ 

Major Barry said reminiscently: ‘I remember a gal out in Simla." " She had red hair too. " "Wife 

of a subaltern." " Did she set the place by the ears?" " I’ll say she did!" " Men went mad about 

 13



her!" " All the women, of course, would have liked to gouge her eyes out!" "  She upset the 
apple cart in more homes than one.’ " "

He chuckled reminiscently. 
‘Husband was a nice quiet fellow." "  Worshipped the ground she walked on." "  Never saw a 
thing—or made out he didn’t.’ " " 
Stephen Lane said in a low voice full of intense feeling: ‘Such women are a menace—a 
menace to—’ 

He stopped. 

Arlena Stuart had come to the water’s edge. Two young men, little more than boys, had 
sprung up and come eagerly towards her. She stood smiling at them. 

Her eyes slid past them to where  PatrickRedfern was coming along the beach. 

It was, Hercule Poirot thought, like watching the needle of a compass.  PatrickRedfern was 
deflected, his feet changed their direction. The needle, do what it will, must obey the law 
of magnetism and turn to the north.  PatrickRedfern’s feet brought him to Arlena Stuart. 

She stood smiling at him. Then she moved slowly along the beach by the side of the 
waves.  PatrickRedfern went with her. She stretched herself out by a rock. PatrickRedfern 
dropped to the shingle beside her. 

Abruptly, ChristineRedfern got up and went into the hotel. 

V 

There was an uncomfortable little silence after she had left. 

Then Emily Brewster said: ‘It’s rather too bad. She’s a nice little thing. They’ve only been 
married a year or two.’ 

‘Gal I was speaking of,’ said Major Barry, ‘the one in Simla." " She upset a couple of really 
happy marriages." " Seemed a pity, what?’ " "

‘There’s a type of woman,’ said Miss Brewster, ‘who likes smashing up homes.’ She added 
after a minute or two, ‘ PatrickRedfern’s a fool!’ 

Hercule Poirot said nothing. He was gazing down the beach, but he was not looking at 
 PatrickRedfern and Arlena Stuart. 

Miss Brewster said: ‘Well, I’d better go and get hold of my boat.’ 

She left them. 

14  



Major Barry turned his boiled gooseberry eyes with mild curiosity on Poirot. 

‘Well, Poirot,’ he said. ‘What are you thinking about?" " You’ve not opened your mouth. 
What do you think of the siren? " "Pretty hot?’ " "

Poirot said:‘C’est possible.’ 

Now then, you old dog." " I know you Frenchmen!’ " "

Poirot said coldly:‘I am not a Frenchman!’ 

‘Well, don’t tell me you haven’t got an eye for a pretty girl! " "What do you think of her, eh?’" " 

Hercule Poirot said:‘She is not young.’ 

‘What does that matter? " "A woman’s as old as she looks! " "Her looks are all right.’ 

Hercule Poirot nodded. He said:‘Yes, she is beautiful. But it is not beauty that counts in 
the end. It is not beauty that makes every head (except one) turn on the beach to look at 
her.’ 

‘It’s IT, my boy,’ said the Major. ‘That’s what it is—IT.’ " "

Then he said with sudden curiosity. 

‘What are you looking at so steadily?’ " "

Hercule Poirot replied:‘I am looking at the exception. At the one man who did not look up 
when she passed.’ 

Major Barry followed his gaze to where it rested on a man of about forty, fair‐haired and 
sun‐tanned. He had a quiet pleasant face and was sitting on the beach smoking a pipe and 
reading The Times. 

‘Oh, that!’" " said Major Barry. ‘That’s the husband, my boy." " That’s KennethMarshall.’ " "


Hercule Poirot said: ‘Yes, I know.’ 

Major Barry chuckled. He himself was a bachelor. He was accustomed to think of The 
Husband in three lights only—as ‘the Obstacle’, ‘the Inconvenience’ or ‘the Safeguard’. 

He said: ‘Seems a nice fellow." " Quiet." " Wonder if my Times has come?’ " "

He got up and went up towards the hotel. 

Poirot’s glance shifted slowly to the face of Stephen Lane. 

 15



Stephen Lane was watching Arlena Marshall and  PatrickRedfern. He turned suddenly to 
Poirot. There was a stern fanatical light in his eyes. 

He said: ‘That woman is evil through and through. Do you doubt it?’ 
 

Poirot said slowly:‘It is difficult to be sure.’ 

Stephen Lane said: ‘But, man alive, don’t you feel it in the air? All round you? The 
presence of Evil.’ 

Slowly, Hercule Poirot nodded his head. 

16  



Chapter 2 

When Rosamund Darnley came and sat down by him, Hercule Poirot made no attempt to 
disguise his pleasure. 

As he has since admitted, he admired Rosamund Darnley as much as any woman he had 
ever met. He liked her distinction, the graceful lines of her figure, the alert proud carriage 
of her head. He liked the neat sleek waves of her dark hair and the ironic quality of her 
smile. 

She was wearing a dress of some navy blue material with touches of white. It looked very 
simple owing to the expensive severity of its line. Rosamund Darnley as Rose Mond Ltd 
was one of London’s best‐known dressmakers. 

She said: ‘I don’t think I like this place.I’m wondering why I came here!’ 

‘You have been here before, have you not?’ 

‘Yes, two years ago, at Easter.There weren’t so many people then.’ 

Hercule Poirot looked at her. He said gently:‘Something has occurred to worry you. That is 
right, is it not?’ 

She nodded. Her foot swung to and fro. She stared down at it. She said: ‘I’ve met a ghost. 
That’s what it is.’ 

‘A ghost, Mademoiselle?’ 

‘Yes.’

‘The ghost of what? Or of whom?’ 

‘Oh, the ghost of myself.’ 

Poirot asked gently:‘Was it a painful ghost?’ 

‘Unexpectedly painful. It took me back, you know...’ 

She paused, musing. Then she said. 

‘Imagine my childhood. No, you can’t! You’re not English!’ 

Poirot asked:‘Was it a very English childhood?’ 

‘Oh, incredibly so! The country—a big shabby house—horses, dogs—walks in the rain—
wood fires—apples in the orchard—lack of money—old tweeds—evening dresses that 
went on from year to year—a neglected garden—with Michaelmas daisies coming out like 
great banners in the autumn...’ 

 17



Poirot asked gently:‘And you want to go back?’ 

Rosamund Darnley shook her head. She said: ‘One can’t go back, can one? That—never. 
But I’d like to have gone on—a different way.’ 

Poirot said:‘I wonder.’ 

Rosamund Darnley laughed. 

‘So do I, really!’ 

Poirot said:‘When I was young (and that, Mademoiselle, is indeed a long time ago) there 
was a game entitled, “If not yourself, who would you be?” One wrote the answer in young 
ladies’ albums. They had gold edges and were bound in blue leather. The answer? 
Mademoiselle, is not really very easy to find.’ 


Rosamund said: ‘No—I suppose not. It would be a big risk. One wouldn’t like to take on 
being Mussolini or Princess Elizabeth. As for one’s friends, one knows too much about 
them.I remember once meeting a charming husband and wife. They were so courteous 
and delightful to one another and seemed on such good terms after years of marriage that 
I envied the woman. I’d have changed places with her willingly. Somebody told me 
afterwards that in private they’d never spoken to each other for eleven years!’ 

She laughed. 

‘That shows, doesn’t it, that you never know?’ 

After a moment or two Poirot said: ‘Many people, Mademoiselle, must envy you.’  

Rosamund Darnley said coolly: ‘Oh, yes. Naturally.’ 

She thought about it, her lips curved upward in their ironic smile. 

‘Yes, I’m really the perfect type of the successful woman! I enjoy the artistic satisfaction of 
the successful creative artist (I really do like designing clothes) and the financial 
satisfaction of the successful business woman. I’m very well off, I’ve a good figure, a 
passable face, and a not too malicious tongue.’ 

She paused. Her smiled widened. 

‘Of course—I haven’t got a husband! I’ve failed there, haven’t I, M. Poirot?’ 

Poirot said gallantly:‘Mademoiselle, if you are not married, it is because none of my sex 
have been sufficiently eloquent. It is from choice, not necessity, that you remain single.’ 

Rosamund Darnley said: ‘And yet, like all men, I’m sure you believe in your heart that no 
woman is content unless she is married and has children.’ 

18  



Poirot shrugged his shoulders. 

‘To marry and have children, that is the common lot of women. Only one woman in a 
hundred—more, in a thousand, can make for herself a name and a position as you have 
done.’ 

Rosamund grinned at him. 

‘And yet, all the same, I’m nothing but a wretched old maid! That’s what I feel today, at 
any rate. I’d be happier with twopence a year and a big silent brute of a husband and a 
brood of brats running after me. That’s true, isn’t it?’ 

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. 

‘Since you say so, then, yes, Mademoiselle.’

Rosamund laughed, her equilibrium suddenly restored. She took out a cigarette and lit it. 

She said: ‘You certainly know how to deal with women, M. Poirot. I now feel like taking the 
opposite point of view and arguing with you in favour of careers for women. Of course I’m 
damned well off as I am—and I know it!’ 

‘Then everything in the garden—or shall we say at the seaside? is lovely, Mademoiselle.’ 

‘Quite right.’ 

Poirot, in his turn, extracted his cigarette case and lit one of those tiny cigarettes which it 
was his affection to smoke. 

Regarding the ascending haze with a quizzical eye, he murmured:‘So Mr—no, Captain 
KennethMarshall is an old friend of yours, Mademoiselle?’ 

Rosamund sat up. She said: ‘Now how do you know that? Oh, I suppose Ken told you.’ 

Poirot shook his head. 

‘Nobody has told me anything.  After all, Mademoiselle, I am a detective. It was the 
obvious conclusion to draw.’ 

Rosamund Darnley said: ‘I don’t see it.’ 

‘But consider!’ The little man’s hands were eloquent.‘You have been here a week. You are 
lively, gay, without a care. Today, suddenly, you speak of ghosts, of old times. What has 
happened? For several days there have been no new arrivals until last night when Captain 
KennethMarshall and his wife and daughter arrive. Today the change! It is obvious!’ 

Rosamund Darnley said: ‘Well, it’s true enough.Kenneth and I were more or less 
children together. The Marshalls lived next door to us. Ken was always nice to me—

 19



although condescending, of course, since he was four years older. I’ve not seen anything 
of him for a long time. It must be—fifteen years at least.’ 

Poirot said thoughtfully:‘A long time.’ 

Rosamund nodded. 

There was a pause and then Hercule Poirot said:‘He is sympathetic, yes?’ 

Rosamund said warmly: ‘Ken’s a dear. One of the best. Ken Frightfully quiet and reserved. I’d 
say his only fault is a penchant for making unfortunate marriages.’ 

Poirot said in a tone of great understanding:‘Ah—’ 

Rosamund Darnley went on. 

‘Kenneth’s a fool—an utter fool where women are concerned! Do you remember the 
Martingdale case?’ 

Poirot frowned. 

‘Martingdale? Martingdale? Arsenic, was it not?’ 

‘Yes. Seventeen or eighteen years ago. The woman was tried for the murder of her 
husband.’ 

‘And he was proved to have been an arsenic eater and she was acquitted?’ 
‘That’s right.  Well, after her acquittal, Ken married her. That’s the sort of damn silly thing 
he does.’ 

Hercule Poirot murmured:‘But if she was innocent?’ 

Rosamund Darnley said impatiently: ‘Oh, I dare say she was innocent. Nobody really 
knows! But there are plenty of women to marry in the world without going out of your 
way to marry one who’s stood her trial for murder.’ 

Poirot said nothing. Perhaps he knew that if he kept silence Rosamund Darnley would go 
on. She did so. 

‘He was very young, of course, only just twenty‐one. He was crazy about her.
 She died when Linda was born—a year after their marriage. I believe Ken was terribly cut up by her 
death. Afterwards he racketed around a lot—trying to forget, I suppose.’ 

She paused. 

‘And then came this business of Arlena Stuart. She was in Revue at the time. There was 
the Codrington divorce case. Lady Codrington divorced Codrington, citing Arlena Stuart. 
20  



They say Lord Codrington was absolutely infatuated with her. It was understood they were 
to be married as soon as the decree was made absolute. Actually, when it came to it, he 
didn’t marry her. Turned her down flat. I believe she actually sued him for breach of 
promise. Anyway, the thing made a big stir at the time. The next thing that happens is that 
Ken goes and marries her. The fool—the complete fool!’ 

Hercule Poirot murmured:‘A man might be excused such a folly—she is beautiful, 
Mademoiselle.’ 

‘Yes, there’s no doubt of that. There was another scandal about three years ago. Old Sir 
Roger Erskine left her every penny of his money. I should have thought that would have 
opened Ken’s eyes if anything would.’ 

‘And did it not?’ 

Rosamund Darnley shrugged her shoulders. 

‘I tell you I’ve seen nothing of him for years. People say, though, that he took it with 
absolute equanimity. Why, I should like to know? Has he got an absolutely blind belief in 
her?’ 

There might be other reasons.’ 

‘Yes. Pride! Keeping a stiff upper lip! I don’t know what he really feels about her. Nobody 
does.’ 

‘And she?  What does she feel about him?’ 

Rosamund stared at him. 

She said: ‘She? She’s the world’s first gold‐digger. And a man‐eater as well! If anything 
personable in trousers comes within a hundred yards of her, it’s fresh sport for Arlena! 
She’s that kind.’ 

Poirot nodded his head slowly in complete agreement. 

‘Yes,’ he said. ‘That is true what you say... Her eyes look for one thing only—men.’ 

Rosamund said: ‘She’s got her eye on  PatrickRedfern now. He’s a good‐looking man—and 
rather the simple kind—you know, fond of his wife, and not a philanderer. That’s the kind 
that’s meat and drink to Arlena. I like little Mrs ChristineRedfern—she’s nice‐looking in her fair 
washed‐out way—but I don’t think she’ll stand a dog’s chance against that man‐eating 
tiger, Arlena.’ 

Poirot said:‘No, it is as you say.’ 

He looked distressed. 

 21



Rosamund said:‘ChristineRedfern  was a school teacher, I believe. She’s the kind that 
thinks that mind has a pull over matter. She’s got a rude shock coming to her.’ 

Poirot shook his head vexedly. 

Rosamund got up. She said: ‘It’s a shame, you know.’ She added vaguely: ‘Somebody 
ought to do something about it.’ 

II 

Linda Marshall was examining her face dispassionately in her bedroom mirror. She disliked 
her face very much. At this minute it seemed to her to be mostly bones and freckles. She 
noted with distaste her heavy bush of soft brown hair (mouse, she called it in her own 
mind), her greenish‐grey eyes, her high cheek‐bones and the long aggressive line of the 
chin. Her mouth and teeth weren’t perhaps quite so bad—but what were teeth after all? 
And was that a spot coming on the side of her nose? 

She decided with relief that it wasn’t a spot. She thought to herself: ‘It’s awful to be 
sixteen—simply awful.’ 

One didn’t, somehow, know where one was. Linda was as awkward as a young colt and as 
prickly as a hedgehog. She was conscious the whole time of her ungainliness and of the 
fact that she was neither one thing nor the other. It hadn’t been so bad at school. But now 
she had left school. Nobody seemed to know quite what she was going to do next. Her 
father talked vaguely of sending her to Paris next winter. Linda didn’t want to go to Paris—
but then she didn’t want to be at home either. She’d never realized properly, somehow, 
until now, how very much she disliked Arlena. 

Linda’s young face grew tense, her green eyes hardened. 

Arlena... 

She thought to herself: ‘She’s a beast—a beast...’ 

Stepmothers! It was rotten to have a stepmother, everybody said so. And it was true! Not 
that Arlena was unkind to her. Most of the time she hardly noticed the girl. But when she 
did, there was a contemptuous amusement in her glance, in her words. The finished grace 
and poise of Arlena’s movements emphasized Linda’s own adolescent clumsiness. With 
Arlena about, one felt, shamingly, just how immature and crude one was. 

But it wasn’t that only. No, it wasn’t only that. 

Linda groped haltingly in the recesses of her mind. She wasn’t very good at sorting out her 
emotions and labelling them. It was something that Arlena did to people—to the house— 

‘She’s bad,’ thought Linda with decision. ‘She’s quite, quite bad.’ 

22  



But you couldn’t even leave it at that. You couldn’t just elevate your nose with a sniff of 
moral superiority and dismiss her from your mind. 

It was something she did to people. Father, now, Father was quite different... 

She puzzled over it. Father coming down to take her out from school. Father taking her 
once for a cruise. And Father at home—with Arlena there. All—all sort of bottled up and 
not—and not there. 

Linda thought: ‘And it’ll go on like this. Day after day—month after month. I can’t bear it.’ 

Life stretched before her—endless—in a series of days darkened and poisoned by Arlena’s 
presence. She was childish enough still to have little sense of proportion. A year, to Linda, 
seemed like an eternity. 

A big dark burning wave of hatred against Arlena surged up in her mind. She thought: ‘I’d 
like to kill her. Oh! I wish she’d die...’ 

She looked out above the mirror on to the sea below. 

This place was really rather fun. Or it could be fun. All those beaches and coves and queer 
little paths. Lots to explore. And places where one could go off by oneself and muck about. 
There were caves, too, so the Cowan boys had told her. 

Linda thought: ‘If only Arlena would go away, I could enjoy myself.’ 

Her mind went back to the evening of their arrival. It had been exciting coming from the 
mainland. The tide had been up over the causeway. They had come in a boat. The hotel 
had looked exciting, unusual. And then on the terrace a tall dark woman had jumped up 
and said: ‘Why, Kenneth!’ 

And her father, looking frightfully surprised, had exclaimed: ‘Rosamund!’ 

Linda considered Rosamund Darnley severely and critically in the manner of youth. 

She decided that she approved of Rosamund. Rosamund, she thought, was sensible. And 
her hair grew nicely—as though it fitted her—most people’s hair didn’t fit them. And her 
clothes were nice. And she had a kind of funny amused face—as though it were amused at 
herself, not at you. Rosamund had been nice to her, Linda. She hadn’t been gushing or 
said things. (Under the term of ‘saying things’ Linda grouped a mass of miscellaneous 
dislikes.) And Rosamund hadn’t looked as though she thought Linda a fool. In fact she’d 
treated Linda as though she was a real human being. Linda so seldom felt like a real 
human being that she was deeply grateful when anyone appeared to consider her one. 

Father, too, had seemed pleased to see Miss Darnley. 

 23



Funny—he’d looked quite different, all of a sudden. He’d looked—he’d looked—Linda 
puzzled it out—why, young, that was it! He’d laughed—a queer boyish laugh. Now Linda 
came to think of it, she’d very seldom heard him laugh. 

She felt puzzled. It was as though she’d got a glimpse of quite a different person. She 
thought: 

‘I wonder what Father was like when he was my age...’ 

But that was too difficult. She gave it up. 

An idea flashed across her mind. 

What fun it would have been if they’d come here and found Miss Darnley here—just she 
and Father. 

A vista opened out just for a minute. Father, boyish and laughing, Miss Darnley, herself—
and all the fun one could have on the island—bathing—caves— 

The blackness shut down again. 

Arlena. One couldn’t enjoy oneself with Arlena about. Why not? Well, she, Linda, couldn’t 
anyway. You couldn’t be happy when there was a person there you—hated. Yes, hated. 
She hated Arlena. 

Very slowly again that black burning wave of hatred rose up again. 

Linda’s face went very white. Her lips parted a little. The pupils of her eyes contracted. 
And her fingers stiffened and clenched themselves... 

III 

Kenneth  tapped on his wife’s door. When her voice answered, he opened the 
door and went in. 

Arlena was just putting the finishing touches to her toilet. She was dressed in glittering 
green and looked a little like a mermaid. She was standing in front of the glass applying 
mascara to her eyelashes. She said: ‘Oh, it’s you, Ken.’  

‘Yes. I wondered if you were ready.’ 

‘Just a minute.’ 

Kenneth trolled to the window. He looked out on the sea. His face, as usual, 
displayed no emotion of any kind. It was pleasant and ordinary. 

Turning round, he said: ‘Arlena?’ 

24  



‘Yes?’ 

‘You’ve met PatrickRedfern before, I gather?’ 

Arlena said easily: ‘Oh yes, darling. At a cocktail party somewhere. I thought he was rather 
a pet.’ 

‘So I gather. Did you know that he and his wife were coming down here?’ 

Arlena opened her eyes very wide. 

 ‘Oh no, darling.   It was the greatest surprise!’  

Kenneth  said quietly: ‘I thought, perhaps, that that was what put the idea of this 
place into your head. You were very keen we should come here.’ 

Arlena put down the mascara. She turned towards him. She smiled—a soft seductive 
smile. She said:  ‘Somebody told me about this place.   I think it was the Rylands.  They said it 
was simply too marvellous—so unspoilt!   Don’t you like it?’  

Kenneth said: ‘I’m not sure.’ 

‘Oh, darling, but you adore bathing and lazing about. I’m sure you’ll simply adore it here.’

‘I can see that you mean to enjoy yourself.’ 

Her eyes widened a little. She looked at him uncertainly. 

Kenneth  said: ‘I suppose the truth of it is that you told young PatrickRedfern that you 
were coming here?’ 

Arlena said: ‘Kenneth darling, you’re not going to be horrid, are you?’ 

Kenneth  said: ‘Look here, Arlena. I know what you’re like. They’re rather a nice 
young couple. That boy’s fond of his wife, really. Must you upset the whole blinking 
show?’ 

Arlena said: ‘It’s so unfair blaming me. I haven’t done anything—anything at all. I can’t 
help it if—’ 

He prompted her. 

‘If what?’ 

Her eyelids fluttered. 

‘Well, of course. I know people do go crazy about me. But it’s not my doing. They just get 

like that.’ 

 25



‘So you do admit that young PatrickRedfern is crazy about you?’ 

Arlena murmured: ‘It’s really rather stupid of him.’ 

She moved a step towards her husband. 

‘But you know, don’t you, Ken, that I don’t really care for anyone but you?’  

She looked up at him through her darkened lashes. 

It was a marvellous look—a look that few men could have resisted. 

Kenneth  looked down at her gravely. His face was composed. His voice quiet. He 
said: 
‘I think I know you pretty well, Arlena...’ 

IV 

When you came out of the hotel on the south side the terraces and the bathing beach 
were immediately below you. There was also a path that led off round the cliff on the 
south‐west side of the island. A little way along it, a few steps led down to a series of 
recesses cut into the cliff and labelled on the hotel map of the island as Sunny Ledge. Here 
cut out of the cliff were niches with seats in them. 

To one of these, immediately after dinner, came  PatrickRedfern and his wife. It was a 
lovely clear night with a bright moon. 

The PatrickRedferns sat down. For a while they were silent. 

At last PatrickRedferns said: ‘It’s a glorious evening, isn’t it, ChristineRedfern?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

Something in her voice may have made him uneasy. He sat without looking at her. 

ChristineRedfern ChristineRedfern asked in her quiet voice: ‘Did you know that woman was going to be 
here?’ 

He turned sharply. He said: ‘I don’t know what you mean.’ 

‘I think you do.’ 

 ‘Look here, ChristineRedfern.   I don’t know what has come over you—’  

She interrupted. Her voice held feeling now. It trembled. 

‘Over me? It’s what has come over you!’ 

‘Nothing’s come over me.’  
26  



‘Oh! PatrickRedfern! it has! You insisted so on coming here. You were quite vehement. I wanted to 
go to Tintagel again where—where we had our honeymoon. You were bent on coming 
here.’ 

‘Well, why not? It’s a fascinating spot.’ 

‘Perhaps.‘‘ But you wanted to come here because she was going to be here.’ ‘

‘ She?   Who is she?’  

‘Mrs Marshall. You—you’re infatuated with her.’ 

‘For God’s sake, ChristineRedfern, don’t make a fool of yourself. It’s not like you to be jealous.’ 

His bluster was a little uncertain. He exaggerated it. 

She said: ‘We’ve been so happy.’ 

‘Happy? Of course we’ve been happy! We are happy. But we shan’t go on being happy if I 
can’t even speak to another woman without you kicking up a row.’ 

It’s not like that.’ 

‘Yes, it is. In marriage one has got to have—well—friendships with other people. This 
suspicious attitude is all wrong. I—I can’t speak to a pretty woman without your jumping 
to the conclusion that I’m in love with her—’ 

He stopped. He shrugged his shoulders. 

ChristineRedfern  said: ‘You are in love with her...’ 

‘Oh, don’t be a fool, ChristineRedfern! I’ve—I’ve barely spoken to her.’ 

‘That’s not true.’ 

‘Don’t for goodness’ sake get into the habit of being jealous of every pretty woman we 
come across.’ 

ChristineRedfern  said: ‘She’s not just any pretty woman! She’s—she’s different! She’s a 
bad lot! Yes, she is. She’ll do you harm, PatrickRedfern, please, give it up. Let’s go away from here.’ 

 PatrickRedfern stuck out his chin mutinously. He looked, somehow, very young as he said 
defiantly: ‘Don’t be ridiculous, ChristineRedfern. And—and don’t let’s quarrel about it.’ 

‘I don’t want to quarrel.’ 

‘Then behave like a reasonable human being. Come on, let’s go back to the hotel.’ 

 27



He got up. There was a pause, then ChristineRedfern  got up too. 

She said: ‘Very well...’ 

In the recess adjoining, on the seat there, Hercule Poirot sat and shook his head 
sorrowfully. 

Some people might have scrupulously removed themselves from earshot of a private 
conversation. But not Hercule Poirot. He had no scruples of that kind. 

‘Besides,’ as he explained to his friend Hastings at a later date, ‘it was a question of 
murder.’ 

Hastings said, staring:‘But the murder hadn’t happened, then

Hercule Poirot sighed. He said:‘But already, mon cher, it was very clearly indicated.’ 

‘Then why didn’t you stop it?’ 

And Hercule Poirot, with a sigh, said as he had said once before in Egypt, that if a person is 
determined to commit murder it is not easy to prevent them. He does not blame himself 
for what happened. It was, according to him, inevitable. 

28  



Chapter 3 

Rosamund Darnley and Kenneth sat on the short springy turf of the cliff 
overlooking Gull Cove. This was on the east side of the island. People came here in the 
morning sometimes to bathe when they wanted to be peaceful. 

Rosamund said: ‘It’s nice to get away from people.’ 

KennethMarshall murmured inaudibly: ‘M—m, yes.’ 

He rolled over, sniffing at the short turf. 

‘Smells good.‘Remember the downs at Shipley?’ ‘

‘Rather.’ 

‘Pretty good, those days.’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘You’ve not changed much, Rosamund.’ 

‘Yes, I have. I’ve changed enormously.’ 

‘You’ve been very successful and you’re rich and all that, but you’re the same old 
Rosamund.’ 

Rosamund murmured: ‘I wish I were.’ 

‘What’s that?’ 

‘Nothing. It’s a pity, isn’t it, Kenneth, that we can’t keep the nice natures and high ideals 
that we had when we were young?’ 

‘I don’t know that your nature was ever particularly nice, my child. You used to get into 
the most frightful rages. You half‐choked me once when you flew at me in a temper.’ 

Rosamund laughed. She said: ‘Do you remember the day that we took Toby down to get 
water rats?’ 

They spent some minutes in recalling old adventures. 

Then there came a pause. 

Rosamund’s fingers played with the clasp of her bag. She said at last: Kenneth?’ 

‘Um.’ His reply was indistinct. He was still lying on his face on the turf. 

 29



‘If I say something to you that is probably outrageously impertinent will you never speak 
to me again?’ 

He rolled over and sat up. 

‘I don’t think,’ he said seriously, ‘that I would ever regard anything you said as 
impertinent. You see, you belong.’ 

She nodded in acceptance of all that last phrase meant. She concealed only the pleasure it 
gave her. 

‘Kenneth, why don’t you get a divorce from your wife?’ 

His face altered. It hardened—the happy expression died out of it. He took a pipe from his 
pocket and began filling it. 

Rosamund said: ‘I’m sorry if I’ve offended you.’ 

He said quietly: ‘You haven’t offended me.’ 

‘Well then, why don’t you?’  

‘You don’t understand, my dear girl.’ 

‘Are you—so frightfully fond of her?’ 

‘It’s not just a question of that. You see, I married her.’ 

‘I know. But she’s—pretty notorious.’ 

He considered that for a moment, ramming in the tobacco carefully. 

‘Is she?I suppose she is.’ 

‘You could divorce her, Ken.’ 

‘My dear girl, you’ve got no business to say a thing like that. Just because men lose their 
heads about her a bit isn’t to say that she loses hers.’ 

Rosamund bit off a rejoinder. Then she said: ‘You could fix it so that she divorced you—if 
you prefer it that way.’ 

‘I dare say I could.’ 

‘You ought to, Ken. Really, I mean it. There’s the child.’ 

‘Linda?’ 

30  



‘Yes, Linda.’ 

‘What’s Linda to do with it?’ 

‘Arlena’s not good for Linda.She isn’t really. Linda, I think, feels things a good deal.’ 

Kenneth applied a match to his pipe. Between puffs he said: ‘Yes—there’s 
something in that. I suppose Arlena and Linda aren’t very good for each other. Not the 
right thing for a girl perhaps. It’s a bit worrying.’ 

Rosamund said: ‘I like Linda—very much. There’s something—fine about her.’ 

Kenneth said: ‘She’s like her mother. She takes things hard like Ruth did.’ 

Rosamund said: ‘Then don’t you think—really—that you ought to get rid of Arlena?’ 

 ‘Fix up a divorce?’  

‘Yes. People are doing that all the time.’ 

Kenneth said with sudden vehemence: ‘Yes, and that’s just what I hate.’ 

‘Hate?’ She was startled. 

Yes. Sort of attitude to life there is nowadays. If you take on a thing and don’t like it, then 
you get yourself out of it as quick as possible! Dash it all, there’s got to be such a thing as 
good faith. If you marry a woman and engage yourself to look after her, well it’s up to you 
to do it. It’s your show. You’ve taken it on. I’m sick of quick marriage and easy divorce.
Arlena’s my wife, that’s all there is to it.’ 

Rosamund leaned forward. She said in a low voice: ‘So it’s like that with you? “Till death 
do us part”?’ 

Kenneth nodded his head. 

He said: ‘That’s just it.’ 

Rosamund said: ‘I see.’ 

II 

Mr Horace Blatt, returning to Leathercombe Bay down a narrow twisting lane, nearly ran 
down Mrs ChristineRedfern at a corner. 

As she flattened herself into the hedge, Mr Blatt brought his Sunbeam to a halt by 
applying the brakes vigorously. 

‘Hullo‐ullo‐ullo,’ said Mr Blatt cheerfully. 

 31



He was a large man with a red face and a fringe of reddish hair round a shining bald spot. 

It was Mr Blatt’s apparent ambition to be the life and soul of any place he happened to be 
in. The Jolly Roger Hotel, in his opinion, given somewhat loudly, needed brightening up. 
He was puzzled at the way people seemed to melt and disappear when he himself arrived 
on the scene. 

‘Nearly made you into strawberry jam, didn’t I?’ said Mr Blatt gaily. 

ChristineRedfern  said: ‘Yes, you did.’ 
‘Jump in,’ said Mr Blatt. 

‘Oh, thanks—I think I’ll walk.’ 
‘Nonsense,’ said Mr Blatt. ‘What’s a car for?’ 

Yielding to necessity ChristineRedfern  got in. 

Mr Blatt restarted the engine which had stopped owing to the suddenness with which he 
had previously pulled up. 

Mr Blatt inquired: ‘And what are you doing walking about all alone? That’s all wrong, a 
nice‐looking girl like you.’ 

ChristineRedfern said hurriedly: ‘Oh! I like being alone.’ 

Mr Blatt gave her a terrific dig with his elbow, nearly sending the car into the hedge at the 
same time. 

‘Girls always say that,’ he said. ‘They don’t mean it. You know, that place, the Jolly Roger, 
wants a bit of livening up. Nothing jolly about it. No life in it.Of course there’s a good 
amount of duds staying there. A lot of kids, to begin with and a lot of old fogeys too. 
There’s that old Anglo‐Indian bore and that athletic parson and those yapping Americans 
and that foreigner with the moustache—makes me laugh that moustache of his! I should 
say he’s a hairdresser, something of that sort.’

ChristineRedfern shook her head. 

‘Oh no, he’s a detective.’ 

Mr Blatt nearly let the car go into the hedge again. 

‘A detective? D’you mean he’s in disguise?’ 

ChristineRedfern smiled faintly. 

She said: ‘Oh no, he really is like that. He’s Hercule Poirot. You must have heard of him.’ 
32  



Mr Blatt said: 
‘Didn’t catch his name properly. 
Oh yes, I’ve heard of him.
 But I thought he was dead. Dash it, he ought to be dead. What’s he after down here?’ 

‘He’s not after anything—he’s just on a holiday.’ 

‘Well, I suppose that might be so,’ Mr Blatt seemed doubtful about it. ‘Looks a bit of a 
bounder, doesn’t he?’ 

‘Well,’ said ChristineRedfern and hesitated. ‘Perhaps a little peculiar.’ 

‘What I say is,’ said Mr Blatt, ‘what’s wrong with Scotland Yard? Buy British every time for 
me.’ 

He reached the bottom of the hill and with a triumphant fanfare of the horn ran the car 
into the Jolly Roger’s garage which was situated, for tidal reasons, on the mainland 
opposite the hotel. 

III 

Linda Marshall was in the small shop which catered for the wants of visitors to 
Leathercombe Bay. One side of it was devoted to shelves on which were books which 
could be borrowed for the sum of twopence. The newest of them was ten years old, some 
were twenty years old and others older still. 

Linda took first one and then another doubtfully from the shelf and glanced into it. She 
decided that she couldn’t possibly read The Four Feathers or Vice Versa. She took out a 
small squat volume in brown calf. 

The time passed... 

With a start Linda shoved the book back in the shelf as ChristineRedfern ’s voice said: 
‘What are you reading, Linda?’ 

Linda said hurriedly: ‘Nothing. I’m looking for a book.’ 

She pulled out The Marriage of William Ashe at random and advanced to the counter 
fumbling for twopence. 

ChristineRedfern said: ‘Mr Blatt just drove me home—after nearly running over me first. I really 
felt I couldn’t walk all across the causeway with him, so I said I had to buy some things.’ 

Linda said: ‘He’s awful, isn’t he? Always saying how rich he is and making the most terrible 
jokes.’ 

ChristineRedfern said: ‘Poor man. One really feels rather sorry for him.’ 

Linda didn’t agree. She didn’t see anything to be sorry for in Mr Blatt. She was young and 
ruthless. 

 33



She walked with ChristineRedfern  out of the shop and down towards the causeway. 

She was busy with her own thoughts. She liked ChristineRedfern . She and Rosamund 
Darnley were the only bearable people on the island in Linda’s opinion. Neither of them 
talked much to her for one thing. Now, as they walked, ChristineRedfern didn’t say anything. That, 
Linda thought, was sensible. If you hadn’t anything worth saying why go chattering all the 
time? 

She lost herself in her own perplexities. 

She said suddenly: ‘Mrs ChristineRedfern, have you ever felt that everything’s so awful—so 
terrible—that you’ll—oh, burst...?’ 

The words were almost comic, but Linda’s face, drawn and anxious, was not. ChristineRedfern 
, looking at her at first vaguely, with scarcely comprehending eyes, certainly saw 
nothing to laugh at... 

She caught her breath sharply. 

She said: ‘Yes—yes—I have felt—just that...’ 

IV 

Mr Blatt said: ‘So you’re the famous sleuth, eh?’ 

They were in the cocktail bar, a favourite haunt of Mr Blatt’s. 

Hercule Poirot acknowledged the remark with his usual lack of modesty. 

Mr Blatt went on. 

‘And what are you doing down here—on a job?’ 

‘No, no. I repose myself.  I take the holiday.’ 

Mr Blatt winked. 

‘You’d say that anyway, wouldn’t you?’ 

Poirot replied:‘Not necessarily.’ 

Horace Blatt said: ‘Oh! Come now. As a matter of fact you’d be safe enough with me. I 
don’t repeat all I hear! Learnt to keep my mouth shut years ago. Shouldn’t have got on the 
way I have if I hadn’t known how to do that. But you know what most people are—yap, 
yap, yap about everything they hear! Now you can’t afford that in your trade! That’s why 
you’ve got to keep it up that you’re here holiday‐making and nothing else.’ 

Poirot asked:‘And why should you suppose the contrary?’ 
34  



Mr Blatt closed one eye. 

He said: ‘I’m a man of the world. I know the cut of a fellow’s jib. A man like you would be 
at Deauville or Le Touquet or down at Juan les Pins. That’s your—what’s the phrase?—
spiritual home.’ 

Poirot sighed. He looked out of the window. Rain was falling and mist encircled the island. 
He said:‘It is possible that you are right! There, at least, in wet weather there are the 
distractions.’ 

‘Good old Casino!’ said Mr Blatt. ‘You know, I’ve had to work pretty hard most of my life. 
No time for holidays or kickshaws. I meant to make good and I have made good. Now I can 
do what I please. My money’s as good as any man’s. I’ve seen a bit of life in the last few 
years, I can tell you.’ 

Poirot murmured:‘Ah, yes?’ 

‘Don’t know why I came to this place,’ Mr Blatt continued. 

Poirot observed:‘I, too, wondered?’ 

‘Eh, what’s that?’ 

Poirot waved an eloquent hand. 

‘I, too, am not without observation.  I should have expected you most certainly to choose 
Deauville or Biarritz.’ 

‘Instead of which, we’re both here, eh?’ 

Mr Blatt gave a hoarse chuckle. 

‘Don’t really know why I came here,’ he mused. ‘I think, you know, it sounded romantic. 
Jolly Roger Hotel, Smugglers’ Island. That kind of address tickles you up, you know. Makes 
you think of when you were a boy. Pirates, smuggling, all that.’ 

He laughed, rather self‐consciously. 

‘I used to sail quite a bit as a boy. Not this part of the world. Off the East coast. Funny how 
a taste for that sort of thing never quite leaves you. I could have a tip‐top yacht if I liked, 
but somehow I don’t really fancy it.I like mucking about in that little yawl of mine. 
PatrickRedfern’s keen on sailing, too. He’s been out with me once or twice.Can’t get hold of him 
now—always hanging round that red‐haired wife of KennethMarshall’s.’ 

He paused, then lowering his voice, he went on: ‘Mostly a dried up lot of sticks in this 
hotel! Mrs Marshall’s about the only lively spot! I should think KennethMarshall’s got his hands full 
looking after her.All sorts of stories about her in her stage days—and after! Men go crazy 
about her. You’ll see, there’ll be a spot of trouble one of these days.’ 

 35



Poirot asked:‘What kind of trouble?’ 

Horace Blatt replied: ‘That depends. I’d say, looking at KennethMarshall, that he’s a man with a 
funny kind of temper. As a matter of fact, I know he is. Heard something about him. I’ve 
met that quiet sort. Never know where you are with that kind. PatrickRedfern had better look 
out—’ 

He broke off, as the subject of his words came into the bar. He went on speaking loudly 
and self‐consciously. 

‘And, as I say, sailing round this coast is good fun. Hullo, PatrickRedfern, have one with me? 
What’ll you have? Dry Martini? Right. What about you, M. Poirot?’ 

Poirot shook his head. 

 PatrickRedfern sat down and said: ‘Sailing? It’s the best fun in the world. Wish I could do 
more of it. Used to spend most of my time as a boy in a sailing dinghy round this coast.’ 

Poirot said:‘Then you know this part of the world well?’ 

‘Rather! I knew this place before there was a hotel on it. There were just a few fishermen’s 
cottages at Leathercombe Bay and a tumbledown old house, all shut up, on the island.’ 

‘There was a house here?’ 

‘Oh, yes, but it hadn’t been lived in for years. Was practically falling down. There used to 
be all sorts of stories of secret passages from the house to Pixy’s Cave. We were always 
looking for that secret passage, I remember.’ 

Horace Blatt spilt his drink. He cursed, mopped himself and asked: ‘What is this Pixy’s 
Cave?’ 

PatrickRedfern said: ‘Oh, don’t you know it? It’s on Pixy Cove. You can’t find the entrance to it 
easily. It’s among a lot of piled up boulders at one end.Just a long thin crack. You can just 
squeeze through it. Inside it widens out into quite a big cave. You can imagine what fun it 
was to a boy! An old fisherman showed it to me. Nowadays, even the fishermen don’t 
know about it. I asked one the other day why the place was called Pixy Cove and he 
couldn’t tell me.’

Hercule Poirot said:‘But I still do not understand. What is this pixy?’ 

 PatrickRedfern said: ‘Oh! that’s typically Devonshire. There’s the pixy’s cave at Sheepstor 
on the Moor. You’re supposed to leave a pin, you know, as a present for the pixy. A pixy is 
a kind of moor spirit.’ 

Hercule Poirot said:‘Ah! but it is interesting, that.’ 

 PatrickRedfern went on. 

36  



‘There’s a lot of pixy lore on Dartmoor still.There are tors that are said to pixy ridden, and 
I expect that farmers coming home after a thick night still complain of being pixy led.’ 

Horace Blatt said: ‘You mean when they’ve had a couple?’ 

 PatrickRedfern said with a smile: ‘That’s certainly the commonsense explanation!’ 

Blatt looked at his watch. He said: ‘I’m going in to dinner. On the whole, PatrickRedfern, pirates 
are my favourites, not pixies.’ 

 PatrickRedfern said with a laugh as the other went out: ‘Faith, I’d like to see the old boy 
pixy led himself!’ 

Poirot observed meditatively:‘For a hard‐bitten business man, M. Blatt seems to have a 
very romantic imagination.’ 

 PatrickRedfern said: ‘That’s because he’s only half educated. Or so my wife says. Look at 
what he reads! Nothing but thrillers or Wild West stories.’ 

Poirot said:‘You mean that he has still the mentality of a boy?’ 

‘Well, don’t you think so, sir?’ 

‘Me, I have not seen very much of him.’ 

‘I haven’t either. I’ve been out sailing with him once or twice—but he doesn’t really like 
having anyone with him. He prefers to be on his own.’ 

Hercule Poirot said:‘That is indeed curious. It is singularly unlike his practice on land.’ 

PatrickRedfern laughed. He said: ‘I know. We all have a bit of trouble keeping out of his way. He’d 
like to turn this place into a cross between Margate and Le Touquet.’ 

Poirot said nothing for a minute or two. He was studying the laughing face of his 
companion very attentively. He said suddenly and unexpectedly:‘I think, M. PatrickRedfern, that 
you enjoy living.’ 
PatrickRedfern stared at him, surprised. 

‘Indeed I do. Why not?’ 

‘Why not indeed,’ agreed Poirot. ‘I make you my felicitation on the fact.’ 

Smiling a little,  PatrickRedfern said: ‘Thank you, sir.’ 

‘That is why, as an older man, a very much older man, I venture to offer you a piece of 
advice.’ 

 37



‘Yes, sir?’ 

‘A very wise friend of mine in the Police Force said to me years ago: “Hercule, my friend, if 
you would know tranquillity, avoid women.”’ 

 PatrickRedfern said: ‘I’m afraid it’s a bit late for that, sir. I’m married, you know.’ 

‘I do know. Your wife is a very charming, a very accomplished woman. She is, I think, very 
fond of you.’ 

 PatrickRedfern said sharply: ‘I’m very fond of her.’ 

‘Ah,’ said Hercule Poirot, ‘I am delighted to hear it.’ 

PatrickRedfern’s brow was suddenly like thunder. 

‘Look here, M. Poirot, what are you getting at?’ 

‘Les Femmes.’ Poirot leaned back and closed his eyes.‘I know something of them. They 
are capable of complicating life unbearably. And the English, they conduct their affairs 
indescribably.If it was necessary for you to come here, M. PatrickRedfern, why, in the name of 
heaven, did you bring your wife?’ 

 PatrickRedfern said angrily: ‘I don’t know what you mean.’ 

Hercule Poirot said calmly:‘You know perfectly. I am not so foolish as to argue with an 
infatuated man. I utter only the word of caution.’ 

‘You’ve been listening to these damned scandal‐mongers. Mrs Gardener, the Brewster 
woman—nothing to do but to clack their tongues all day. Just because a woman’s good‐
looking—they’re down on her like a sack of coals.’ 

Hercule Poirot got up. He murmured:‘Are you really as young as all that?’ 

Shaking his head, he left the bar.  PatrickRedfern stared angrily after him. 

V 

Hercule Poirot paused in the hall on his way from the dining‐room. The doors were open—
a breath of soft night air came in. 

The rain had stopped and the mist had dispersed. It was a fine night again. 

Hercule Poirot found ChristineRedfern in her favourite seat on the cliff ledge. He stopped by 
her and said:‘This seat is damp. You should not sit here.You will catch the chill.’

‘No, I shan’t. And what does it matter anyway.’ 

38  



‘Tscha, tscha, you are not a child! You are an educated woman.You must look at things 
sensibly.’ 

She said coldly: ‘I can assure you I never take cold.’ 

Poirot said:‘It has been a wet day. The wind blew, the rain came down, and the mist was 
everywhere so that one could not see through it. Eh bien, what is it like now? The mists 
have rolled away, the sky is clear and up above the stars shine.That is like life, Madame.’ 

ChristineRedfern said in a low fierce voice: ‘Do you know what I am most sick of in this place?’ 

‘What, Madame?’ 

‘Pity.’ 

She brought the word out like the flick of a whip. 

She went on: ‘Do you think I don’t know? That I can’t see? All the time people are saying: 
“Poor Mrs ChristineRedfern—that poor little woman.” And anyway I’m not little, I’m tall. They say 
little because they are sorry for me. And I can’t bear it!’ 

Cautiously, Hercule Poirot spread his handkerchief on the seat and sat down. He said 
thoughtfully:‘There is something in that.’ 

‘That woman—’ said ChristineRedfern and stopped. 

Poirot said gravely:‘Will you allow me to tell you something, Madame? Something that is 
as true as the stars above us? The Arlena Stuarts—or Arlena Marshalls—of this world—do 
not count.’ 

ChristineRedfern  said: ‘Nonsense.’

‘I assure you, it is true. Their Empire is of the moment and for the moment. To count—
really and truly to count—a woman must have goodness or brains.’ 

ChristineRedfern said scornfully: ‘Do you think men care for goodness or brains?’ 

Poirot said gravely:‘Fundamentally, yes.’ 

ChristineRedfern laughed shortly. 

‘I don’t agree with you.’ 

Poirot said:‘Your husband loves you, Madame. I know it.’ 

‘You can’t know it.’

‘Yes, yes. I know it. I have seen him looking at you.’ 

 39



Suddenly she broke down. She wept stormily and bitterly against Poirot’s accommodating 
shoulder. 

She said: ‘I can’t bear it...I can’t bear it...’ 

Poirot patted her arm. He said soothingly:‘Patience—only patience.’ 

She sat up and pressed her handkerchief to her eyes. She said in a stifled voice: ‘It’s all 
right. I’m better now. Leave me. I’d—I’d rather be alone.’ 

He obeyed and left her sitting there while he himself followed the winding path down to 
the hotel. 

He was nearly there when he heard the murmur of voices. 

He turned a little aside from the path. There was a gap in the bushes. 

He saw Arlena Marshall and  PatrickRedfern beside her. He heard the man’s voice, with 
the throb in it of emotion. 

‘I’m crazy about you—crazy—you’ve driven me mad...You do care a little—you do care?’ 

He saw Arlena Marshall’s face—it was, he thought, like a sleek happy cat—it was animal, 
not human. She said softly: ‘Of course, PatrickRedfern darling, I adore you.You know that...’ 


For once Hercule Poirot cut his eavesdropping short. He went back to the path and on 
down to the hotel. 

A figure joined him suddenly. It was Captain KennethMarshall. 

KennethMarshall said: ‘Remarkable night, what? After that foul day.’ He looked up at the sky. 
‘Looks as though we should have fine weather tomorrow.’ 

40  



Chapter 4 

The morning of the 25th of August dawned bright and cloudless. It was a morning to 
tempt even an inveterate sluggard to rise early. 

Several people rose early that morning at the Jolly Roger. 

It was eight o’clock when Linda, sitting at her dressing‐table, turned a little thick calf 
bound volume face downwards, sprawling it open and looked at her own face in the 
mirror. 

Her lips were set tight together and the pupils of her eyes contracted. 

She said below her breath: ‘I’ll do it...’ 

She slipped out of her pyjamas and into her bathing‐dress. Over it she flung on a bath‐
robe and laced espadrilles on her feet. 

She went out of her room and along the passage. At the end of it a door on to the balcony 
led to an outside staircase leading directly down to the rocks below the hotel. There was a 
small iron ladder clamped on to the rocks leading down into the water which was used by 
many of the hotel guests for a before‐breakfast dip as taking up less time than going down 
to the main bathing beach. 

As Linda started down from the balcony she met her father coming up. He said: ‘You’re up 
early. Going to have a dip?’ 

Linda nodded. 

They passed each other. 

Instead of going on down the rocks, however, Linda skirted round the hotel to the left 
until she came to the path down to the causeway connecting the hotel with the mainland. 
The tide was high and the causeway under water, but the boat that took hotel guests 
across was tied to a little jetty. The man in charge of it was absent at the moment. Linda 
got in, untied it and rowed herself across. 

She tied up the boat on the other side, walked up the slope, past the hotel garage and 
along until she reached the general shop. 

The woman had just taken down the shutters and was engaged in sweeping out the floor. 
She looked amazed at the sight of Linda. 

'Well, Miss, you are up early.’ 

Linda put her hand in the pocket of her bath‐wrap and brought out some money. She 
proceeded to make her purchases. 

 41



II 

ChristineRedfern  was standing in Linda’s room when the girl returned. 

‘Oh, there you are,’ ChristineRedfern exclaimed. ‘I thought you couldn’t be really up yet.’ 


Linda said: ‘No, I’ve been bathing.’ 

Noticing the parcel in her hand, ChristineRedfern said with surprise: ‘The post has come early 
today.’ 

Linda flushed. With her habitual nervous clumsiness the parcel slipped from her hand. The 
flimsy string broke and some of the contents rolled over the floor. 

ChristineRedfern exclaimed: ‘What have you been buying candles for?’ 

But to Linda’s relief she did not wait for an answer, but went on, as she helped to pick the 
things up from the floor. 

‘I came in to ask whether you would like to come with me to Gull Cove this morning. I 
want to sketch there.’ 

Linda accepted with alacrity. 

In the last few days she had accompanied ChristineRedfern  more than once on sketching 
expeditions. ChristineRedfern was a most indifferent artist, but it is possible that she found the 
excuse of painting a help to her pride since her husband now spent most of his time with 
Arlena Marshall. 

Linda Marshall had been increasingly morose and bad tempered. She liked being with 
ChristineRedfern who, intent on her work, spoke very little. It was, Linda felt, nearly as good as 
being by oneself, and in a curious way she craved for company of some kind. There was a 
subtle kind of sympathy between her and the elder woman, probably based on the fact of 
their mutual dislike of the same person. 

ChristineRedfern said: ‘I’m playing tennis at twelve, so we’d better start fairly early. Half‐past ten?’ 

‘Right. I’ll be ready. Meet you in the hall.’ 

III 

Rosamund Darnley, strolling out of the dining‐room after a very late breakfast, was 
cannoned into by Linda as the latter came tearing down the stairs. 

‘Oh! sorry, Miss Darnley.’ 

Rosamund said: ‘Lovely morning, isn’t it? One can hardly believe it after yesterday.’ 

42  



‘I know. I’m going with ChristineRedfern to Gull Cove. I said I’d meet her at half‐past ten. I 
thought I was late.’

‘No, it’s only twenty‐five past.’ 

‘Oh! good.’ 

She was panting a little and Rosamund looked at her curiously. 

‘You’re not feverish, are you, Linda?’ 

The girls’ eyes were very bright and she had a vivid patch of colour in each cheek. 

‘Oh! no. I’m never feverish.’ 

Rosamund smiled and said: ‘It’s such a lovely day I got up for breakfast. Usually I have it in 
bed. But today I came down and faced eggs and bacon like a man.’ 

‘I know—it’s heavenly after yesterday. Gull Cove is nice in the morning. I shall put a lot of 
oil on and get really brown.’ 

Rosamund said: ‘Yes, Gull Cove is nice in the morning. And it’s more peaceful than the 
beach here.’ 

Linda said, rather shyly: ‘Come too.’ 

Rosamund shook her head. 

She said: ‘Not this morning. I’ve other fish to fry.’ 

ChristineRedfern  came down the stairs. 

She was wearing beach pyjamas of a loose floppy pattern with long sleeves and wide legs. 
They were made of some green material with a yellow design. Rosamund’s tongue itched 
to tell her that yellow and green were the most unbecoming colours possible for her fair, 
slightly anaemic complexion. It always annoyed Rosamund when people had no clothes 
sense. 

She thought: ‘If I dressed that girl, I’d soon make her husband sit up and take notice. 
However much of a fool Arlena is, she does know how to dress. This wretched girl looks 
just like a wilting lettuce.’ 

Aloud she said: ‘Have a nice time. I’m going to Sunny Ledge with a book.’ 

IV 

Hercule Poirot breakfasted in his room as usual off coffee and rolls. 

 43



The beauty of the morning, however, tempted him to leave the hotel earlier than usual. It 
was ten o’clock, at least half an hour before his usual appearance, when he descended to 
the bathing beach. The beach itself was empty save for one person. 

That person was Arlena Marshall. 

Clad in her white bathing‐dress, the green Chinese hat on her head, she was trying to 
launch a white wooden float. Poirot came gallantly to the rescue, completely immersing a 
pair of white suède shoes in doing so. 

She thanked him with one of those sideways glances of hers. 

Just as she was pushing off, she called him. 

‘M. Poirot?’ 

Poirot leaped to the water’s edge. 

‘Madame.’ 

Arlena Marshall said: ‘Do something for me, will you?’ 

‘Anything.’ 

She smiled at him. She murmured: ‘Don’t tell any one where I am.’She made her glance 
appealing. ‘Every one will follow me about so. I just want for once to be alone.’ 

She paddled off vigorously. 

Poirot walked up the beach. He murmured to himself:‘Ah ça, jamais! That, par exemple, I 
do not believe.’ 

He doubted if Arlena Stuart, to give her her stage name, had ever wanted to be alone in 
her life. 

Hercule Poirot, that man of the world, knew better. Arlena Marshall was doubtless 
keeping a rendezvous, and Poirot had a very good idea with whom. 

Or thought he had, but there he found himself proved wrong. 

For just as she floated rounded the point of the bay and disappeared out of sight, PatrickRedfern 
 closely followed by Kenneth, came striding down the beach from the 
hotel. 

KennethMarshall nodded to Poirot, ’Morning, Poirot. Seen my wife anywhere about?’ 

Poirot’s answer was diplomatic. 

44  



‘Has Madame then risen so early?’ 

KennethMarshall said: ‘She’s not in her room.’He looked up at the sky. ‘Lovely day. I shall have a 
bathe right away. Got a lot of typing to do this morning.’ 

PatrickRedfern , less openly, was looking up and down the beach. He sat down near Poirot 
and prepared to wait for the arrival of his lady. 

Poirot said:‘And Madame ChristineRedfern?Has she too risen early?’ 

PatrickRedfern  said: ‘ChristineRedfern?Oh, she’s going off sketching. She’s rather keen on art just 
now.’ 

He spoke impatiently, his mind clearly elsewhere. As time passed he displayed his 
impatience for Arlena’s arrival only too crudely. At every footstep he turned an eager head 
to see who it was coming down from the hotel. 

Disappointment followed disappointment. 

First Mr and Mrs Gardener complete with knitting and book and then Miss Brewster 
arrived. 

Mrs Gardener, industrious as ever, settled herself in her chair, and began to knit 
vigorously and talk at the same time. 

‘Well. M. Poirot. The beach seems very deserted this morning. Where is everybody?’ 

Poirot replied that the Mastermans and the Cowans, two families with young people in 
them, had gone off on an all‐day sailing excursion. 

‘Why that certainly does make all the difference, not having them about laughing and 
calling out. And only one person bathing, Captain KennethMarshall.’ 

KennethMarshall had just finished his swim. He came up the beach swinging his towel. 

‘Pretty good in the sea this morning,’ he said. ‘Unfortunately I’ve got a lot of work to do. 
Must go and get on with it.’ 

‘Why, if that isn’t too bad, Captain KennethMarshall. On a beautiful day like this, too.My, wasn’t 
yesterday too terrible?I said to Mr Gardener that if the weather was going to continue 
like that we’d just have to leave. It’s the melancholy, you know, with the mist right up 
around the island. Gives you a kind of ghostly feeling, but then I’ve always been very 
susceptible to atmosphere ever since I was a child. Sometimes, you know, I’d feel I just 
had to scream and scream.And that, of course, was very trying to my parents. But my 
mother was a lovely woman and she said to my father, “Sinclair, if the child feels like that, 
we must let her do it. Screaming is her way of expressing herself.” And of course, my 
father agreed. He was devoted to my mother and just did everything she said. They were a 

 45



perfectly lovely couple, as I’m sure Mr Gardener will agree. They were a very remarkable 
couple, weren’t they, Odell?’ 

‘Yes, darling,’ said Mr Gardener. 

 ‘And where’s your girl this morning, Captain KennethMarshall?’  

‘Linda? I don’t know. I expect she’s mooning round the island somewhere.’ 

‘You know, Captain KennethMarshall, that girl looks kind of peaky to me. She needs feeding up and 
very very sympathetic treatment.’ 

Kenneth said curtly:‘Linda’s all right.’ 

He went up to the hotel. 

PatrickRedfern  did not go into the water. He sat about, frankly looking up towards the 
hotel. He was beginning to look a shade sulky. 

Miss Brewster was brisk and cheerful when she arrived. 

The conversation was much as it had been on a previous morning. Gentle yapping from 
Mrs Gardener and short staccato barks from Miss Brewster. 

She remarked at last: ‘Beach seems a bit empty. Everyone off on excursions?’ 

Mrs Gardener said:  ‘I was saying to Mr Gardener only this morning that we simply must 
make an excursion to Dartmoor.   It’s quite near and the associations are all so romantic.  
 And I’d like to see that convict prison—Princetown, isn’t it?  I think we’d better fix up right 
away and go there tomorrow, Odell.’  

Mr Gardener said: ‘Yes, darling.’ 

Hercule Poirot said to Miss Brewster. 

‘You are going to bathe, Mademoiselle?’ 

‘Oh I’ve had my morning dip before breakfast. Somebody nearly brained me with a bottle, 
too. Chucked it out of one of the hotel windows.’ 

‘Now that’s a very dangerous thing to do,’ said Mrs Gardener. ‘I had a very dear friend 
who got concussion by a toothpaste tin falling on him in the street—thrown out of a 
thirty‐fifth storey window it was. A most dangerous thing to do. He got very substantial 
damages.’ She began to hunt among her skeins of wool. ‘Why, Odell, I don’t believe I’ve 
got that second shade of purple wool. It’s in the second drawer of the bureau in our 
bedroom or it might be the third.’ 

‘Yes, darling.’ 

46  



Mr Gardener rose obediently and departed on his search. 

Mrs Gardener went on: ‘Sometimes, you know, I do think that maybe we’re going a little 
too far nowadays. What with all our great discoveries and all the electrical waves there 
must be in the atmosphere, I do think it leads to a great deal of mental unrest, and I just 
feel that maybe the time has come for a new message to humanity. I don’t know, M. 
Poirot, if you’ve ever interested yourself in the prophecies from the Pyramids.’ 

‘I have not,’ said Poirot. 

 ‘Well, I do assure you that they’re very, very interesting.  What with Moscow being exactly 
a thousand miles due north of—now what was it?  —would it be Nineveh?  —but anyway 
you take a circle and it just shows the most surprising things—and one can just see that 
there must have been special guidance, and that those ancient Egyptians couldn’t have 
thought of what they did all by themselves.   And when you’ve gone into the theory of the 
numbers and their repetition, why it’s all just so clear that I can’t see how anyone can 
doubt the truth of it for a moment.’  

Mrs Gardener paused triumphantly but neither Poirot nor Miss Emily Brewster felt moved 
to argue the point. 

Poirot studied his white suède shoes ruefully. 

Emily Brewster said: ‘You been paddling with your shoes on, M. Poirot?’ 

Poirot murmured:‘Alas! I was precipitate.’ 

Emily Brewster lowered her voice. She said: ‘Where’s our vamp this morning? She’s late.’ 

Mrs Gardener, raising her eyes from her knitting to study PatrickRedfern , murmured: ‘He 
looks just like a thundercloud. Oh dear, I do feel the whole thing is such a pity. I wonder 
what Captain KennethMarshall thinks about it all. He’s such a nice quiet man—very British and 
unassuming. You just never know what he’s thinking about things.’ 

PatrickRedfern  rose and began to pace up and down the beach. 

Mrs Gardener murmured: ‘Just like a tiger.’ 

Three pairs of eyes watched his pacing. Their scrutiny seemed to make PatrickRedfern  
uncomfortable. He looked more than sulky now. He looked in a flaming temper. 

In the stillness a faint chime from the mainland came to their ears. 

Emily Brewster murmured: ‘Wind’s from the east again.That’s a good sign when you can 
hear the church clock strike.’ 

Nobody said any more until Mr Gardener returned with a skein of brilliant magenta wool. 

 47



‘Why, Odell, what a long time you have been?’ 

‘Sorry darling, but you see it wasn’t in your bureau at all.I found it on your wardrobe 
shelf.’ 

‘Why, isn’t that too extraordinary? I could have declared I put it in that bureau drawer. I 
do think it’s fortunate that I’ve never had to give evidence in a court case. I’d just worry 
myself to death in case I wasn’t remembering a thing just right.’ 

Mr Gardener said: ‘Mrs Gardener is very conscientious.’ 

V 

It was some five minutes later that PatrickRedfern  said: ‘Going for your row this morning, 
Miss Brewster? Mind if I come with you?’ 

Miss Brewster said heartily: ‘Delighted.’ 

‘Let’s row right round the island,’ proposed . 

Miss Brewster consulted her watch. 

‘Shall we have time? Oh yes, it’s not half‐past eleven yet. Come on, then, let’s start.’ 

They went down the beach together. 

PatrickRedfern  took first turn at the oars. He rowed with a powerful stroke. The boat 
leapt forward. 

Emily Brewster said approvingly: ‘Good. We’ll see if you can keep that up.’ 

He laughed into her eyes. His spirits had improved. 

‘I shall probably have a fine crop of blisters by the time we get back.’He threw up his 
head, tossing back his black hair. ‘God, it’s a marvellous day! If you do get a real summer’s 
day in England there’s nothing to beat it.’ 

Emily Brewster said gruffly: ‘Can’t beat England anyway in my opinion. Only place in the 
world to live in.’ 

‘I’m with you.’ 

They rounded the point of the bay to the west and rowed under the cliffs. PatrickRedfern  
looked up. 

‘Any one on Sunny Ledge this morning? Yes, there’s a sunshade. Who is it, I wonder?’ 

Emily Brewster said: ‘It’s Miss Darnley, I think. She’s got one of those Japanese affairs.’ 
48  



They rowed up the coast. On their left was the open sea. 

Emily Brewster said: ‘We ought to have gone the other way round. This way we’ve got the 
current against us.’ 

‘There’s very little current. I’ve swum out here and not noticed it. Anyway we couldn’t go 
the other way, the causeway wouldn’t be covered.’ 

‘Depends on the tide, of course. But they always say that bathing from Pixy Cove is 
dangerous if you swim out too far.’ 

PatrickRedfern was rowing vigorously still. At the same time he was scanning the cliffs attentively. 

Emily Brewster thought suddenly: ‘He’s looking for the Marshall woman. That’s why he 
wanted to come with me. She hasn’t shown up this morning and he’s wondering what 
she’s up to. Probably she’s done it on purpose. Just a move in the game—to make him 
keener.’ 

They rounded the jutting point of rock to the south of the little bay named Pixy’s Cove. It 
was quite a small cove, with rocks dotted fantastically about the beach. It faced nearly 
north‐west and the cliff overhung it a good deal. It was a favourite place for picnic teas. In 
the morning, when the sun was off, it was not popular and there was seldom anyone 
there. 

On this occasion, however, there was a figure on the beach. 

PatrickRedfern ’s stroke checked and recovered. 

He said in a would‐be casual tone: ‘Hullo, who’s that?’ 

Miss Brewster said dryly: ‘It looks like Mrs Marshall.’ 

PatrickRedfern  said, as though struck by the idea. 

‘o it does.’ 

He altered his course, rowing inshore. 

Emily Brewster protested. 

‘We don’t want to land here, do we?’ 

PatrickRedfern  said quickly: ‘Oh, plenty of time.’ 

His eyes looked into hers—something in them, a naive pleading look rather like that of an 
importunate dog, silenced Emily Brewster. She thought to herself: ‘Poor boy, he’s got it 
badly. Oh well, it can’t be helped. He’ll get over it in time.’ 

 49



The boat was fast approaching the beach. 

Arlena Marshall was lying face downwards on the shingle, her arms outstretched. The 
white float was drawn up nearby. 

Something was puzzling Emily Brewster. It was as though she was looking at something 
she knew quite well but which was in one respect quite wrong. 

It was a minute or two before it came to her. 

Arlena Marshall’s attitude was the attitude of a sun‐bather. So had she lain many a time 
on the beach by the hotel, her bronzed body outstretched and the green cardboard hat 
protecting her head and neck. 

But there was no sun on Pixy’s Beach and there would be none for some hours yet. The 
overhanging cliff protected the beach from the sun in the morning. A vague feeling of 
apprehension came over Emily Brewster. 

The boat grounded on the shingle. PatrickRedfern  called: ‘Hullo, Arlena.’ 

And then Emily Brewster’s foreboding took definite shape. For the recumbent figure did 
not move or answer. 

Emily saw PatrickRedfern ’s face change. He jumped out of the boat and she followed him. 
They dragged the boat ashore then set off up the beach to where that white figure lay so 
still and unresponsive near the bottom of the cliff. 

PatrickRedfern  got there first but Emily Brewster was close behind him. 

She saw, as one sees in a dream, the bronzed limbs, the white backless bathing‐dress—the 
red curl of hair escaping under the jade‐green hat—saw something else too—the curious 
unnatural angle of the outspread arms. Felt, in that minute, that this body had not lain 
down but had been thrown... 

She heard PatrickRedfern’s voice—a mere frightened whisper. He knelt down beside that still 
form—touched the hand—the arm... 

He said in a low shuddering whisper: ‘My God, she’s dead...’ 

And then, as he lifted the hat a little, peered at the neck: ‘Oh, God, she’s been strangled... 
murdered.’ 

VI 

It was one of those moments when time stands still. 

With an odd feeling of unreality Emily Brewster heard herself saying: ‘We musn’t touch 
anything... Not until the police come.’ 

50  



’s answer came mechanically. 

‘No—no—of course not.’And then in a deep agonized whisper. ‘Who?
 Who? Who could 
have done that to Arlena. She can’t have—have been murdered. It can’t be true!’ 

Emily Brewster shook her head, not knowing quite what to answer. 

She heard him draw in his breath—heard the low controlled rage in his voice as he said: 
‘My God, if I get my hands on the foul fiend who did this.’ 

Emily Brewster shivered. Her imagination pictured a lurking murderer behind one of the 
boulders. Then she heard her voice saying: ‘Whoever did it wouldn’t be hanging about. We 
must get the police. Perhaps—’ she hesitated—‘one of us ought to stay with—with the 
body.’ 

PatrickRedfern  said: ‘I’ll stay.’ 

Emily Brewster drew a little sigh of relief. She was not the kind of woman who would ever 
admit to feeling fear, but she was secretly thankful not to have to remain on that beach 
alone with the faint possibility of a homicidal maniac lingering close at hand. 

She said: ‘Good. I’ll be as quick as I can. I’ll go in the boat. Can’t face that ladder. There’s a 
constable at Leathercombe Bay.’ 

PatrickRedfern  murmured mechanically: ‘Yes—yes, whatever you think best.’ 

As she rowed vigorously away from the shore, Emily Brewster saw PatrickRedfern drop down 
beside the dead woman and bury his head in his hands. There was something so forlorn 
about his attitude that she felt an unwilling sympathy. He looked like a dog watching by its 
dead master. Nevertheless her robust common sense was saying to her: ‘Best thing that 
could have happened for him and his wife—and for KennethMarshall and the child—but I don’t 
suppose he can see it that way, poor devil.’ 

Emily Brewster was a woman who could always rise to an emergency. 

 51



52  



Chapter 5 

Inspector Colgate stood back by the cliff waiting for the police‐surgeon to finish with 
Arlena’s body. PatrickRedfern  and Emily Brewster stood a little to one side. 

Dr Neasden rose from his knees with a quick deft movement. 

He said: ‘Strangled—and by a pretty powerful pair of hands. She doesn’t seem to have put 
up much of a struggle. Taken by surprise.H’m—well—nasty business.’ 

Emily Brewster had taken one look and then quickly averted her eyes from the dead 
woman’s face. That horrible purple convulsed countenance. 

Inspector Colgate asked: ‘What about time of death?’

factors to take into account. Let’s see, it’s quarter to one now. What time was it when you 
found her?’ 

PatrickRedfern , to whom the question was addressed, said vaguely: ‘Some time before 
twelve. I don’t know exactly.’ 

Emily Brewster said: ‘It was exactly a quarter to twelve when we found she was dead.’ 

Ah, and you came here in the boat. What time was it when you caught sight of her lying 
here?’ 

Emily Brewster considered. 

‘I should say we rounded the point about five or six minutes earlier.’ She turned to 
PatrickRedfern. ‘Do you agree?’ 

He said vaguely: ‘Yes—yes—about that, I should think.’

Neasden asked the Inspector in a low voice: ‘This the husband? Oh! I see, my mistake. 
Thought it might be. He seems rather done in over it.’ 

He raised his voice officially. 

‘Let’s put it at twenty minutes to twelve.She cannot have been killed very long before 
that. Say between then and eleven—quarter to eleven at the earliest outside limit.’ 

The Inspector shut his notebook with a snap. 
‘Thanks,’ he said. ‘That ought to help us considerably.Puts it within very narrow limits—
less than an hour all told.’ 

He turned to Miss Brewster. 
 53



‘Now then, I think it’s all clear so far.You’re Miss Emily Brewster and this is Mr PatrickRedfern 
PatrickRedfern, both staying at the Jolly Roger Hotel.You identify this lady as a fellow guest of 
yours at the hotel—the wife of a Captain KennethMarshall?’ 

Emily Brewster nodded. 

Then, I think,’ said Inspector Colgate, ‘that we’ll adjourn to the hotel.’ 

He beckoned to a constable. 

‘Hawkes, you stay here and don’t allow anyone on to this cove. I’ll be sending Phillips 
along later.’ 

II 

‘Upon my soul!’said Colonel Weston. ‘This is a surprise finding you here!’ 

Hercule Poirot replied to the Chief Constable’s greeting in a suitable manner. He 
murmured:‘Ah, yes, many years have passed since that affair at St Loo.’ 

‘I haven’t forgotten it, though,’ said Weston. ‘Biggest surprise of my life. The thing I’ve 
never got over, though, is the way you got round me about that funeral business. 
Absolutely unorthodox, the whole thing. Fantastic!’ 

‘Tout de même, mon Colonel,’ said Poirot. ‘It produced the goods, did it not?’ 

‘Er—well, possibly. I dare say we should have got there by more orthodox methods.’ 

‘It is possible,’ agreed Poirot diplomatically. 

‘And here you are in the thick of another murder,’ said the Chief Constable. ‘Any ideas 
about this one?’ 

Poirot said slowly:‘Nothing definite—but it is interesting.’ 

‘Going to give us a hand?’ 

‘You would permit it, yes?’ 

‘My dear fellow, delighted to have you. Don’t know enough yet to decide whether it’s a 
case for Scotland Yard or not. Off‐hand it looks as though our murderer must be pretty 
well within a limited radius. On the other hand, all these people are strangers down here. 
To find out about them and their motives you’ve got to go to London.’ 

Poirot said:‘Yes, that is true.’

54  



‘First of all,’ said Weston, ‘we’ve got to find out who last saw the dead woman alive. 
Chambermaid took her her breakfast at nine. Girl in the bureau downstairs saw her pass 
through the lounge and go out about ten.’ 

‘My friend,’ said Poirot, ‘I suspect that I am the man you want.’ 

‘You saw her this morning? What time?’ 

‘At five minutes past ten.I assisted her to launch her float from the bathing beach.’ 

‘And she went off on it?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘Alone?’ 

‘Yes.’  

‘Did you see which direction she took?’ 

‘She paddled round that point there to the right.’ 

‘In the direction of Pixy’s Cove, that is?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘And the time then was—?’ 

‘I should say she actually left the beach at a quarter past ten.’ 

Weston considered. 

‘That fits in well enough. How long should you say that it would take her to paddle round 
to the Cove?’ 

‘Ah me, I am not an expert. I do not go in boats or expose myself on floats. Perhaps half an 
hour?’ 

‘That’s about what I think,’ said the Colonel. ‘She wouldn’t be hurrying, I presume. Well, if 
she arrived there at a quarter to eleven, that fits in well enough.’ 

‘At what time does your doctor suggest she died?’ 

‘Oh, Neasden doesn’t commit himself. He’s a cautious chap. A quarter to eleven is his 
earliest outside limit.’ 

Poirot nodded. He said:‘There is one other point that I must mention. As she left, Mrs 
Marshall asked me not to say I had seen her.’ 

 55



Weston stared. 

He said: ‘H’m, that’s rather suggestive, isn’t it?’ 

Poirot murmured. 

Yes. I thought so myself.’ 

Weston tugged at his moustache. He said: ‘Look here, Poirot. You’re a man of the world. 
What sort of a woman was Mrs Marshall?’ 

A faint smile came to Poirot’s lips. 

He asked:‘Have you not already heard?’ 

The Chief Constable said dryly: ‘I know what the women say of her. They would. How 
much truth is there in it? Was she having an affair with this fellow PatrickRedfern?’ 

‘I should say undoubtedly yes.’ 

‘He followed her down here, eh?’ 

‘There is reason to suppose so.’ 

‘And the husband? Did he know about it? What did he feel?’

Poirot said slowly:‘It is not easy to know what Captain KennethMarshall feels or thinks. He is a 
man who does not display his emotions.’ 

Weston said sharply: ‘But he might have ’em, all the same.’ 

Poirot nodded. He said:‘Oh yes, he might have them.’ 

III 

The Chief Constable was being as tactful as it was in his nature to be with Mrs Castle. 

Mrs Castle was the owner and proprietress of the Jolly Roger Hotel. She was a woman of 
forty odd with a large bust, rather violent henna red hair, and an almost offensively 
refined manner of speech. 

She was saying: ‘That such a thing should happen in my hotel! Ay am sure it has always 
been the quayettest place imaginable! The people who come here are such naice people. 
No rowdiness—if you know what ay mean. Not like the big hotels in St Loo.’ 

‘Quite so, Mrs Castle,’ said Colonel Weston. ‘But accidents happen in the best regulated—
er households.’ 

56  



‘Ay’m sure Inspector Colgate will bear me out,’ said Mrs Castle, sending an appealing 
glance towards the Inspector who was sitting looking very official. ‘As to the laycensing 
laws, ay am most particular. There has never been any irregularity!’ 

‘Quite, quite,’ said Weston. ‘We’re not blaming you in any way, Mrs Castle.’ 


‘But it does so reflect upon an establishment,’ said Mrs Castle, her large bust heaving. 
‘When ay think of the noisy gaping crowds. Of course no one but hotel guests are allowed 
upon the island—but all the same they will no doubt come and point from the shore.’ 

She shuddered. 

Inspector Colgate saw his chance to turn the conversation to good account. 

He said: ‘In regard to that point you’ve just raised. Access to the island. How do you keep 
people off?’ 

‘Ay am most particular about it.’ 

‘Yes, but what measures do you take? What keeps ’em off? Holiday crowds in summer 
time swarm everywhere like flies.’ 

Mrs Castle shrugged slightly again. 

She said: ‘That is the fault of the charabancs. Ay have seen eighteen at one time parked by 
the quay at Leathercombe Bay. Eighteen!’ 

‘Just so. How do you stop them coming here?’ 

‘There are notices. And then, of course, at high tide, we are cut off.’ 

‘Yes, but at low tide?’ 

Mrs Castle explained. At the island end of the causeway there was a gate. This said ‘Jolly 
Roger Hotel. Private. No entry except to Hotel.’ The rocks rose sheer out of the sea on 
either side there and could not be climbed. 

‘Anyone could take a boat, though, I suppose, and row round and land on one of the 
coves? You couldn’t stop them doing that. There’s a right of access to the foreshore. You 
can’t stop people being on the beach between low and high watermark.’ 

But this, it seemed, very seldom happened. Boats could be obtained at Leathercombe Bay 
harbour, but from there it was a long row to the island, and there was also a strong 
current just outside Leathercombe Bay harbour. 

There were notices, too, on both Gull Cove and Pixy Cove by the ladder. She added that 
George or William were always on the look out at the bathing beach proper which was the 
nearest to the mainland. 

 57



‘Who are George and William?’ 

‘George attends to the bathing beach. He sees to the costumes and the floats. William is 
the gardener. He keeps the paths and marks the tennis courts and all that.’ 

Colonel Weston said impatiently: ‘Well, that seems clear enough. That’s not to say that 
nobody could have come from outside, but anyone who did so took a risk—the risk of 
being noticed. We’ll have a word with George and William presently.’ 

Mrs Castle said: ‘Ay do not care for trippers—a very noisy crowd, and they frequently 
leave orange peel and cigarette boxes on the causeway and down by the rocks, but all the 
same ay never thought one of them would turn out to be a murderer. Oh dear! it really is 
too terrible for words. A lady like Mrs Marshall murdered and what’s so horrible, 
actually—er—strangled...’ 

Mrs Castle could hardly bring herself to say the word. She brought it out with the utmost 
reluctance. 

Inspector Colgate said soothingly: ‘Yes, it’s a nasty business.’ 

 ‘And the newspapers.   My hotel in the newspapers!’  

Colgate said, with a faint grin. 

‘Oh well, it’s advertisement, in a way.’

Mrs Castle drew herself up. Her bust heaved and whalebone creaked. She said icily: ‘That 
is not the kind of advertisement ay care about, Mr Colgate.’ 

Colonel Weston broke in. He said: ‘Now then, Mrs Castle, you’ve got a list of the guests 
staying here, as I asked you?’ 

‘Yes, sir.’ 

Colonel Weston pored over the hotel register. He looked over to Poirot who made the 
fourth member of the group assembled in the manageress’s office. 

‘This is where you’ll probably be able to help us presently.’ 

He read down the names. 

‘What about servants?’ 

Mrs Castle produced a second list. 

‘There are four chambermaids, the head waiter and three under him and Henry in the bar. 
William does the boots and shoes. Then there’s the cook and two under her.’ 

58  



‘What about the waiters?’ 

‘Well, sir, Albert, the Mater Dotel, came to me from the Vincent at Plymouth. He was 
there for some years. The three under him have been here for three years—one of them 
four. They are very naise lads and most respectable. Henry has been here since the hotel 
opened. He is quite an institution.’ 

Weston nodded. He said to Colgate: ‘Seems all right. You’ll check up on them, of course. 
Thank you, Mrs Castle.’ 

‘That will be all you require?’

‘For the moment, yes.’ 

Mrs Castle creaked out of the room. 

Weston said: ‘First thing to do is to talk with Captain KennethMarshall. 

IV 

Kenneth sat quietly answering the questions put to him. Apart from a slight 
hardening of his features he was quite calm. Seen here, with the sunlight falling on him 
from the window, you realized that he was a handsome man. Those straight features, the 
steady blue eyes, the firm mouth. His voice was low and pleasant. 

Colonel Weston was saying: ‘I quite understand, Captain KennethMarshall, what a terrible shock 
this must be to you. But you realize that I am anxious to get the fullest information as soon 
as possible.’ 

KennethMarshall nodded. 

He said: ‘I quite understand. Carry on.’

‘Mrs Marshall was your second wife?’

‘Yes.’ 

‘And you have been married how long?’ 

‘Just over four years.’ 

‘And her name before she was married?’

‘Helen Stuart. Her acting name was Arlena Stuart.’

‘She was an actress?’

‘She appeared in Revue and musical shows.’

 59



‘Did she give up the stage on her marriage?’ 

‘No. She continued to appear. She actually retired only about a year and a half ago.’ 

‘Was there any special reason for her retirement?’ 

Kenneth appeared to consider. 

‘No,’ he said. ‘She simply said that she was tired of it all.’ 

‘It was not—er—in obedience to your special wish?’ 

KennethMarshall raised his eyebrows. 

‘Oh, no.’ 

‘You were quite content for her to continue acting after your marriage?’ 

KennethMarshall smiled very faintly. 

‘I should have preferred her to give it up—that, yes. But I made no fuss about it.’ 

‘It caused no point of dissension between you?’ 

‘Certainly not. My wife was free to please herself.’ 

‘And—the marriage was a happy one?’ 

Kenneth  said coldly: ‘Certainly.’

Colonel Weston paused a minute. Then he said:‘Captain KennethMarshall, have you any idea who 
could possibly have killed your wife?’ 

The answer came without the least hesitation. 

‘None whatever.’ 

‘Had she any enemies?’ 

‘Possibly.’ 

‘Ah?’ 

The other went on quickly. He said: ‘Don’t misunderstand me, sir. My wife was an actress. 
She was also a very good‐looking woman. In both capacities she aroused a certain amount 
of jealousy and envy. There were fusses over parts—there was rivalry from other 
women—there was a good deal, shall we say, of general envy, hatred, malice, and all 

60  



uncharitableness! But that is not to say that there was anyone who was capable of 
deliberately murdering her.’ 

Hercule Poirot spoke for the first time. He said: ‘What you really mean, Monsieur, is that 
her enemies were mostly or entirely, women?’ 

Kenneth looked across at him. 

‘Yes,’ he said. ‘That is so.’ 

The Chief Constable said: ‘You know of no man who had a grudge against her?’ 

‘No.’ 

‘Was she previously acquainted with anyone in this hotel?’ 

‘I believe she had met Mr PatrickRedfern before—at some cocktail party. Nobody else to my 
knowledge.’ 

Weston paused. He seemed to deliberate as to whether to pursue the subject. Then he 
decided against that course. He said: ‘We now come to this morning. When was the last 
time you saw your wife?’ 

KennethMarshall paused a minute, then he said: ‘I looked in on my way down to breakfast—’ 

‘Excuse me, you occupied separate rooms?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘And what time was that?’ 

‘It must have been about nine o’clock.’ 

‘What was she doing?’ 

‘She was opening her letters.’ 

‘Did she say anything?’ 

‘Nothing of any particular interest. Just good morning—and that it was a nice day—that 
sort of thing.’ 

‘What was her manner? Unusual at all?’ 

‘No, perfectly normal.’ 

‘She did not seem excited, or depressed, or upset in any way?’ 

 61



‘I certainly didn’t notice it.’ 

Hercule Poirot said:‘Did she mention at all what were the contents of her letters?’ 

Again a faint smile appeared on KennethMarshall’s lips. He said: ‘As far as I can remember, she said 
they were all bills.’ 

‘Your wife breakfasted in bed?’

‘Yes.’ 

‘Did she always do that?’

‘Invariably.’ 

Hercule Poirot said:‘What time did she usually come downstairs?’ 

‘Oh! between ten and eleven—usually nearer eleven.’ 

Poirot went on:‘If she was to descend at ten o’clock exactly, that would be rather 
surprising?’ 

‘Yes. She wasn’t often down as early as that.’ 

‘But she was this morning.Why do you think that was, Captain KennethMarshall?’ 

KennethMarshall said unemotionally: ‘Haven’t the least idea. Might have been the weather—extra 
fine day and all that.’ 

‘You missed her?’ 

Kenneth  shifted a little in his chair. He said: ‘Looked in on her again after 
breakfast. Room was empty. I was a bit surprised.’ 

‘And then you came down on the beach and asked me if I had seen her?’ 

 ‘Er—yes.’  He added with a faint emphasis in his voice.  ‘And you said you hadn’t...’  

The innocent eyes of Hercule Poirot did not falter. Gently he caressed his large and 
flamboyant moustache. 

Weston asked: ‘Had you any special reason for wanting to find your wife this morning?’

KennethMarshall shifted his glance amiably to the Chief Constable. 

He said: ‘No, just wondered where she was, that’s all.’ 

62  



Weston paused. He moved his chair slightly. His voice fell into a different key. He said: 
‘Just now, Captain KennethMarshall, you mentioned that your wife had a previous acquaintance 
with Mr  PatrickRedfern. How well did your wife know Mr PatrickRedfern?’ 

Kenneth said: ‘Mind if I smoke?’ He felt through his pockets. ‘Dash! I’ve mislaid 
my pipe somewhere.’ 

Poirot offered him a cigarette which he accepted. Lighting it, he said: ‘You were asking 
about PatrickRedfern. My wife told me she had come across him at some cocktail party or other.’

‘He was, then, just a casual acquaintance?’ 

‘I believe so.’ 

‘Since then—’ the Chief Constable paused. ‘I understand that that acquaintanceship has 
ripened into something rather closer.’ 

KennethMarshall said sharply: ‘You understand that, do you? Who told you so?’

‘It is the common gossip of the hotel.’ 

For a moment KennethMarshall’s eyes went to Hercule Poirot. They dwelt on him with a kind of 
cold anger. He said: ‘Hotel gossip is usually a tissue of lies!’ 

‘Possibly. But I gather that Mr PatrickRedfern and your wife gave some grounds for the gossip.’ 

‘What grounds?’ 

‘They were constantly in each other’s company.’ 

‘Is that all?’ 

‘You do not deny that that was so?’ 

‘May have been. I really didn’t notice.’ 

‘You did not—excuse me, Captain KennethMarshall—object to your wife’s friendship with Mr 
PatrickRedfern?’

‘I wasn’t in the habit of criticizing my wife’s conduct.’ 

‘You did not protest or object in any way?’ 

‘Certainly not.’ 

‘Not even though it was becoming a subject of scandal and an estrangement was growing 
up between Mr PatrickRedfern and his wife?’ 

 63



Kenneth said coldly: ‘I mind my own business and I expect other people to mind 
theirs. I don’t listen to gossip and tittle tattle.’ 

‘You won’t deny that Mr PatrickRedfern admired your wife?’ 

‘He probably did. Most men did. She was a very beautiful woman.’ 

‘But you yourself were persuaded that there was nothing serious in the affair?’ 

‘I never thought about it, I tell you.’ 

‘And suppose we have a witness who can testify that they were on terms of the greatest 
intimacy?’ 

Again those blue eyes went to Hercule Poirot. Again an expression of dislike showed on 
that usually impassive face. 

KennethMarshall said: ‘If you want to listen to these tales, listen to ’em. My wife’s dead and can’t 
defend herself.’ 

‘You mean that you, personally, don’t believe them?’ 

For the first time a faint dew of sweat was observable on KennethMarshall’s brow. He said: ‘I don’t 
propose to believe anything of the kind.’ 

He went on: ‘Aren’t you getting a good way from the essentials of this business? What I 
believe or don’t believe is surely not relevant to the plain fact of murder?’ 

Hercule Poirot answered before either of the others could speak. He said:‘You do not 
comprehend, Captain KennethMarshall. There is no such thing as a plain fact of murder. Murder 
springs, nine times out of ten, out of the character and circumstances of the murdered 
person. Because the victim was the kind of person he or she was, therefore was he or she 
murdered! Until we can understand fully and completely exactly what kind of a person 
Arlena Marshall was, we shall not be able to see clearly exactly the kind of person who 
murdered her. From that springs the necessity of our questions.’ 

KennethMarshall turned to the Chief Constable. He said: ‘That your view, too?’ 

Weston boggled a little. He said: ‘Well, up to a point—that is to say—’ 

KennethMarshall gave a short laugh. He said:  ‘Thought you wouldn’t agree.   This character stuff is 
M. Poirot’s speciality, I believe.’   

Poirot said, smiling:‘You can at least congratulate yourself on having done nothing to 
assist me!’ 

‘What do you mean?’

64  



‘What have you told us about your wife? Exactly nothing at all. You have told us only what 
everyone could see for themselves. That she was beautiful and admired. Nothing more.’ 

Kenneth shrugged his shoulders. He said simply: ‘You’re crazy.’ 

He looked towards the Chief Constable and said with emphasis: ‘Anything else, sir, that 
you’d like me to tell you?’ 

‘Yes, Captain KennethMarshall, your own movements this morning, please.’ 

Kenneth  nodded. He had clearly expected this. 

He said: ‘I breakfasted downstairs about nine o’clock as usual and read the paper. As I told 
you I went up to my wife’s room afterwards and found she had gone out. I came down to 
the beach, saw M. Poirot and asked if he had seen her. Then I had a quick bathe and went 
up to the hotel again. It was then, let me see, about twenty to eleven—yes, just about 
that. I saw the clock in the lounge. It was just after twenty minutes to. I went up to my 
room, but the chambermaid hadn’t quite finished it. I asked her to finish as quickly as she 
could. I had some letters to type which I wanted to get off by the post. I went downstairs 
again and had a word or two with Henry in the bar. I went up again to my room at ten 
minutes to eleven. There I typed my letters. I typed until ten minutes to twelve. I then 
changed into tennis kit as I had a date to play tennis at twelve. We’d booked the court the 
day before.’

‘Who was we?’ 

‘Mrs ChristineRedfern, Miss Darnley, Mr Gardener and myself. I came down at twelve o’clock and 
went up to the court. Miss Darnley was there and Mr Gardener. ChristineRedfern arrived a few 
minutes later We played tennis for an hour. Just as we came into the hotel afterwards I—
I—got the news.’ 

‘Thank you, Captain KennethMarshall. Just as a matter of form, is there anyone who can 
corroborate the fact that you were typing in your room between—er—ten minutes to 
eleven and ten minutes to twelve?’ 

Kenneth  said with a faint smile: ‘Have you got some idea that I killed my own 
wife? Let me see now. The chambermaid was about doing the rooms. She must have 
heard the typewriter going. And then there are the letters themselves. With all this upset I 
haven’t posted them. I should imagine they are as good evidence as anything.’ 

He took three letters from his pocket. They were addressed, but not stamped. He said: 
‘Their contents, by the way, are strictly confidential. But when it’s a case of murder, one is 
forced to trust in the discretion of the police. They contain lists of figures and various 
financial statements. I think you will find that if you put one of your men on to type them 
out, he won’t do it in much under an hour.’ 

He paused. 

 65



‘Satisfied, I hope?’ 

Weston said smoothly. 

‘It is no question of suspicion. Everyone on the island will be asked to account for his or 
her movements between a quarter to eleven and twenty minutes to twelve this morning.’ 

Kenneth  said: ‘Quite.’ 

Weston said: ‘One more thing, Captain KennethMarshall. Do you know anything about the way 
your wife was likely to have disposed of any property she had?’ 

‘You mean a will? I don’t think she ever made a will.’ 

‘But you are not sure?’ 

‘Her solicitors are Barkett, Markett and Applegood, Bedford Square. They saw to all her 
contracts, etc. But I’m fairly certain she never made a will. She said once that doing a thing 
like that would give her the shivers.’ 

‘In that case, if she has died intestate, you, as her husband, succeed to her property.’ 

‘Yes, I suppose I do.’ 

‘Had she any near relatives?’ 

‘I don’t think so. If she had, she never mentioned them. I know that her father and mother 
died when she was a child and she had no brothers or sisters.’ 

‘In any case, I suppose, she had nothing very much to leave?’ 

Kenneth said coldly: ‘On the contrary. Only two years ago, Sir Robert Erskine, 
who was an old friend of hers, died and left her most of his fortune. It amounted, I think, 
to about fifty thousand pounds.’ 

Inspector Colgate looked up. An alertness came into his glance. Up to now he had been 
silent. Now he asked: ‘Then actually, Captain KennethMarshall, your wife was a rich woman?’ 

Kenneth  shrugged his shoulders. 

‘I suppose she was really.’ 

‘And you still say she did not make a will?’ 

‘You can ask the solicitors. But I’m pretty certain she didn’t. As I tell you, she thought it 
unlucky.’ 

There was a pause then KennethMarshall added: ‘Is there anything further?’ 
66  



Weston shook his head. 

‘Don’t think so—eh Colgate? No. Once more, Captain KennethMarshall, let me offer you all my 
sympathy in your loss.’ 

KennethMarshall blinked. He said jerkily: ‘Oh—thanks.’ 

He went out. 

V 

The three men looked at each other. 

Weston said: ‘Cool customer. Not giving anything away, is he? What do you make of him, 
Colgate?’ 

The Inspector shook his head. 

‘It’s difficult to tell. He’s not the kind that shows anything. That sort makes a bad 
impression in the witness‐box, and yet it’s a bit unfair on them really. Sometimes they’re 
as cut up as anything and yet can’t show it. That kind of manner made the jury bring in a 
verdict of Guilty against Wallace. It wasn’t the evidence. They just couldn’t believe that a 
man could lose his wife and talk and act so coolly about it.’ 

Weston turned to Poirot. 

‘What do you think, Poirot?’ 

Hercule Poirot raised his hands. 

He said: ‘What can one say? He is the closed box—the fastened oyster. He has chosen his 
rôle. He has heard nothing, he has seen nothing, he knows nothing!’ 

‘We’ve got a choice of motives,’ said Colgate. ‘There’s jealousy and there’s the money 
motive. Of course, in a way, a husband’s the obvious suspect. One naturally thinks of him 
first. If he knew his missus was carrying on with the other chap—’ 

Poirot interrupted. 

He said: ‘I think he knew that.’ 

‘Why do you say so?’ 

‘Listen, my friend. Last night I had been talking with Mrs ChristineRedfern on Sunny Ledge. I came 
down from there to the hotel and on my way I saw those two together—Mrs Marshall and 
 PatrickRedfern. And a moment or two after I met Captain KennethMarshall. His face was very stiff. 
It says nothing—but nothing at all! It is almost too blank, if you understand me. Oh! he 
knew all right.’ 

 67



Colgate grunted doubtfully. 

He said: ‘Oh well, if you think so—’ 

‘I am sure of it! But even then, what does that tell us? What did Kenneth  feel 
about his wife?’ 

Colonel Weston said: ‘Takes her death coolly enough.’ 

Poirot shook his head in a dissatisfied manner. 

Inspector Colgate said: ‘Sometimes these quiet ones are the most violent underneath, so 
to speak. It’s all bottled up. He may have been madly fond of her—and madly jealous. But 
he’s not the kind to show it.’ 

Poirot said slowly: ‘That is possible—yes. He is a very interesting character this Captain 
KennethMarshall. I interest myself in him greatly. And in his alibi.’ 

‘Alibi by typewriter,’ said Weston with a short bark of a laugh. ‘What have you got to say 
about that, Colgate?’ 

Inspector Colgate screwed up his eyes. He said: ‘Well, you know, sir, I rather fancy that 
alibi. It’s not too good, if you know what I mean. It’s—well, it’s natural. And if we find the 
chambermaid was about, and did hear the typewriter going, well then, it seems to me that 
it’s all right and that we’ll have to look elsewhere.’ 

‘H’m,’ said Colonel Weston. ‘Where are you going to look?’ 

VI 

For a minute or two the three men pondered the question. 

Inspector Colgate spoke first. He said: ‘It boils down to this—was it an outsider, or a guest 
at the hotel? I’m not eliminating the servants entirely, mind, but I don’t expect for a 
minute that we’ll find any of them had a hand in it. No, it’s a hotel guest, or it’s someone 
from right outside. We’ve got to look at it this way. First of all—motive. There’s gain. The 
only person to gain by her death was the lady’s husband, it seems. What other motives are 
there? First and foremost—jealousy. It seems to me—just looking at it—that if ever you’ve 
got a crime passionnel—(he bowed to Poirot) this is one.’ 

Poirot murmured as he looked up at the ceiling: ‘There are so many passions.’ 

Inspector Colgate went on: ‘Her husband wouldn’t allow that she had any enemies—real 
enemies, that is, but I don’t believe for a minute that that’s so! I should say that a lady like 
her would—well, would make some pretty bad enemies—eh, sir, what do you say?’ 

68  



Poirot responded. He said: ‘Mais oui, that is so. Arlena Marshall would make enemies. But 
in my opinion, the enemy theory is not tenable, for you see, Inspector, Arlena Marshall’s 
enemies would, I think, as I said just now, always be women.’ 

Colonel Weston grunted and said: ‘Something in that. It’s the women who’ve got their 
knife into her here all right.’ 

Poirot went on. 

‘It seems to be hardly possible that this crime was committed by a woman. What does the 
medical evidence say?’ 

Weston grunted again. He said: ‘Neasden’s pretty confident that she was strangled by a 
man. Big hands—powerful grip. It’s just possible, of course, that an unusually athletic 
woman might have done it—but it’s damned unlikely.’ 

Poirot nodded. 

‘Exactly. Arsenic in a cup of tea—a box of poisoned chocolates—a knife—even a pistol—
but strangulation—no! It is a man we have to look for.’ 

‘And immediately,’ he went on, ‘it becomes more difficult. There are two people here in 
this hotel who have a motive for wishing Arlena Marshall out of the way—but both of 
them are women.’ 

Colonel Weston asked: ‘PatrickRedfern’s wife is one of them, I suppose?’ 

‘Yes. Mrs ChristineRedfern might have made up her mind to kill Arlena Stuart. She had, let us say, 
ample cause. I think, too, that it would be possible for Mrs ChristineRedfern to commit a murder. 
But not this kind of murder. For all her unhappiness and jealousy, she is not, I should say, a 
woman of strong passions. In love, she would be devoted and loyal—not passionate. As I 
said just now—arsenic in the teacup, possibly—strangulation, no. I am sure, also, that she 
is physically incapable of committing this crime, her hands and feet are small, below the 
average.’ 

Weston nodded. He said: ‘This isn’t a woman’s crime. No, a man did this.’ 

Inspector Colgate coughed. 

‘Let me put forward a solution, sir. Say that prior to meeting this Mr PatrickRedfern the lady had 
had another affair with someone—call him X. She turns X down for Mr PatrickRedfern. X is mad 
with rage and jealousy. He follows her down here, stays somewhere in the 
neighbourhood, comes over to the island, does her in. It’s a possibility!’ 

Weston said: ‘It’s possible, all right. And if it’s true, it ought to be easy to prove. Did he 
come on foot or in a boat? The latter seems more likely. If so, he must have hired a boat 
somewhere. You’d better make inquiries.’ 

 69



He looked across at Poirot. 

‘What do you think of Colgate’s suggestion?’ 

Poirot said slowly: ‘It leaves, somehow, too much to chance. And besides—somewhere 
the picture is not true. I cannot, you see, imagine this man... the man who is mad with 
rage and jealousy.’ 

Colgate said: ‘People did go potty about her, though, sir. Look at PatrickRedfern.’ 

‘Yes, yes... But all the same—’ 

Colgate looked at him questioningly. 

Poirot shook his head. 

He said, frowning: ‘Somewhere, there is something that we have missed...’ 

70  



Chapter 6 

Colonel Weston was poring over the hotel register. 

He read aloud: 

‘Major and Mrs Cowan, 
Miss Pamela Cowan, 
Master Robert Cowan, 
Master Evan Cowan, 
Rydal’s Mount, Leatherhead. 

Mr and Mrs Masterman, 
Mr Edward Masterman, 
Miss Jennifer Masterman, 
Mr Roy Masterman, 
Master Frederick Masterman, 
5 Marlborough Avenue, London, N.W. 

Mr and Mrs Gardener, 
New York. 

Mr and Mrs ChristineRedfern, 
Crossgates, Seldon, Princes Risborough. 

Major Barry, 
18 Cardon St., St James, London, S.W.1. 

Mr Horace Blatt, 
5 Pickersgill Street, London, E.C.2. 

M. Hercule Poirot, 
Whitehaven Mansions, London, W.1. 

Miss Rosamund Darnley, 
8 Cardigan Court, W.1. 

Miss Emily Brewster, 
Southgates, Sunbury‐on‐Thames. 

Rev. Stephen Lane, 
London. 

Captain and Mrs Marshall, 
Miss Linda Marshall, 
73 Upcott Mansions, London, S.W.7.’ 

He stopped. 
 71



Inspector Colgate said: ‘I think, sir, that we can wash out the first two entries. Mrs Castle 
tells me that the Mastermans and the Cowans come here regularly every summer with 
their children. This morning they went off on an all‐day excursion sailing, taking lunch with 
them. They left just after nine o’clock. A man called Andrew Baston took them. We can 
check up from him, but I think we can put them right out of it.’ 

Weston nodded. 

‘I agree. Let’s eliminate everyone we can. Can you give us a pointer on any of the rest of 
them, Poirot?’ 

Poirot said: ‘Superficially, that is easy. The Gardeners are a middle‐aged married couple, 
pleasant, travelled. All the talking is done by the lady. The husband is acquiescent. He 
plays tennis and golf and has a form of dry humour that is attractive when one gets him to 
oneself.’ 

‘Sounds quite O.K.’ 

‘Next—the PatrickRedferns. Mr PatrickRedfern is young, attractive to women, a magnificent swimmer, a 
good tennis player and accomplished dancer. His wife I have already spoken of to you. She 
is quiet, pretty in a washed‐out way. She is, I think, devoted to her husband. She has 
something that Arlena Marshall did not have.’ 

‘What is that?’ 

‘Brains.’ 

Inspector Colgate sighed. He said: ‘Brains don’t count for much when it comes to an 
infatuation, sir.’ 

‘Perhaps not. And yet I do truly believe that in spite of his infatuation for Mrs Marshall, 
 PatrickRedfern really cares for his wife.’ 

‘That may be, sir. It wouldn’t be the first time that’s happened.’ 

Poirot murmured. 

‘That is the pity of it! It is always the thing women find hardest to believe.’ 

He went on: ‘Major Barry. Retired Indian Army. An admirer of women. A teller of long and 
boring stories.’ 

Inspector Colgate sighed. 

‘You needn’t go on. I’ve met a few, sir.’ 

‘Mr Horace Blatt. He is, apparently, a rich man. He talks a good deal—about Mr Blatt. He 
wants to be everybody’s friend. It is sad. For nobody likes him very much. And there is 

72  



something else. Mr Blatt last night asked me a good many questions. Mr Blatt was uneasy. 
Yes, there is something not quite right about Mr Blatt.’ 

He paused and went on with a change of voice: ‘Next comes Miss Rosamund Darnley. Her 
business name is Rose Mond Ltd. She is a celebrated dressmaker. What can I say of her? 
She has brains and charm and chic. She is very pleasing to look at.’ He paused and added. 
‘And she is a very old friend of Captain KennethMarshall’s.’ 

Weston sat up in his chair. 

‘Oh, she is, is she?’ 

‘Yes. They had not met for some years.’ 

Weston asked: ‘Did she know he was going to be down here?’ 

‘She says not.’ 

Poirot paused and then went on. 

‘Who comes next? Miss Brewster. I find her just a little alarming.’ He shook his head. ‘She 
has a voice like a man’s. She is gruff and what you call hearty. She rows boats and has a 
handicap of four at golf.’ He paused. ‘I think, though, that she has a good heart.’ 

Weston said: ‘That leaves only the Reverend Stephen Lane. Who’s the Reverend Stephen 
Lane?’ 

‘I can only tell you one thing. He is a man who is in a condition of great nervous tension. 
Also he is, I think, a fanatic.’ 

Inspector Colgate said: ‘Oh, that kind of person.’ 

Weston said: ‘And that’s the lot!’ He looked at Poirot. ‘You seem very lost in thought, my 
friend?’ 

Poirot said: ‘Yes. Because, you see, when Mrs Marshall went off this morning and asked 
me not to tell anyone I had seen her. I jumped at once in my own mind to a certain 
conclusion. I thought that her friendship with  PatrickRedfern had made trouble between 
her and her husband. I thought that she was going to meet  PatrickRedfern somewhere, 
and that she did not want her husband to know where she was.’ 

He paused. 

‘But that, you see, was where I was wrong. Because, although her husband appeared 
almost immediately on the beach and asked if I had seen her,  PatrickRedfern arrived 
also—and was most patently and obviously looking for her! And therefore, my friends, I 
am asking myself, who was it that Arlena Marshall went off to meet?’ 

 73



Inspector Colgate said: ‘That fits in with my idea. A man from London or somewhere.’ 

Hercule Poirot shook his head. He said: ‘But, my friend, according to your theory, Arlena 
Marshall had broken with this mythical man. Why, then, should she take such trouble and 
pains to meet him?’ 

Inspector Colgate shook his head. He said: ‘Who do you think it was?’ 

‘That is just what I cannot imagine. We have just read through the list of hotel guests. 
They are all middle‐aged—dull. Which of them would Arlena Marshall prefer to  
PatrickRedfern? No, that is impossible. And yet, all the same, she did go to meet someone—and 
that someone was not  PatrickRedfern.’ 

Weston murmured: ‘You don’t think she just went off by herself?’ 

Poirot shook his head. 

‘Mon cher,’ he said. ‘It is very evident that you never met the dead woman. Somebody 
once wrote a learned treatise on the difference that solitary confinement would mean to 
Beau Brummel or to a man like Newton. Arlena Marshall, my dear friend, would practically 
not exist in solitude. She only lived in the light of a man’s admiration. No, Arlena Marshall 
went to meet someone this morning. Who was it?’ 

II 

Colonel Weston sighed, shook his head and said: ‘Well, we can go into theories later. Got 
to get through these interviews now. Got to get it down in black and white where 
everyone was. I suppose we’d better see the Marshall girl now. She might be able to tell 
us something useful.’ 

Linda Marshall came into the room clumsily, knocking against the doorpost. She was 
breathing quickly and the pupils of her eyes were dilated. She looked like a startled young 
colt. Colonel Weston felt a kindly impulse towards her. 

He thought: ‘Poor kid—she’s nothing but a kid after all. This must have been a pretty bad 
shock to her.’ 

He drew up a chair and said in a reassuring voice. 

‘Sorry to put you through this, Miss—Linda, isn’t it?’ 

‘Yes, Linda.’ 

Her voice had that indrawn breathy quality that is often characteristic of schoolgirls. Her 
hands rested helplessly on the table in front of him—pathetic hands, big and red, with 
large bones and long wrists. 

Weston thought: ‘A kid oughtn’t to be mixed up in this sort of thing.’ 

74  



He said reassuringly. 

‘There’s nothing very alarming about all this. We just want you to tell us anything you 
know that might be useful, that’s all.’ 

Linda said: ‘You mean—about Arlena?’ 

‘Yes. Did you see her this morning at all?’ 

The girl shook her head. 

‘No. Arlena always gets down rather late. She has breakfast in bed.’ 

Hercule Poirot said: ‘And you, Mademoiselle?’ 

‘Oh, I get up. Breakfast in bed’s so stuffy.’ 

Weston said: ‘Will you tell us what you did this morning?’ 

‘Well, I had a bathe first and then breakfast, and then I went with Mrs ChristineRedfern to Gull 
Cove.’ 

Weston said: ‘What time did you and Mrs ChristineRedfern start?’ 

‘She said she’d be waiting for me in the hall at half‐past ten. I was afraid I was going to be 
late, but it was all right. We started off at about three minutes to the half‐hour.’ 

Poirot said: ‘And what did you do at Gull Cove?’ 

‘Oh, I oiled myself and sunbathed and Mrs ChristineRedfern sketched. Then, later, I went into the 
sea and ChristineRedfern went back to the hotel to get changed for tennis.’ 

Weston said, keeping his voice quite casual: ‘Do you remember what time that was?’ 

‘When Mrs ChristineRedfern went back to the hotel? Quarter to twelve.’ 

‘Sure of that time—quarter to twelve?’ 

Linda, opening her eyes wide, said: ‘Oh yes. I looked at my watch.’ 

‘The watch you have on now?’ 

Linda glanced down at her wrist. 

‘Yes.’ 

Weston said: ‘Mind if I see?’ 

 75



She held out her wrist. He compared the watch with his own and with the hotel clock on 
the wall. 

He said, smiling: ‘Correct to a second. And after that you had a bathe?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘And you got back to the hotel—when?’ 

‘Just about one o’clock. And—and then—I heard—about Arlena...’ 

Her voice changed. 

Colonel Weston said: ‘Did you—er—get on with your stepmother all right?’ 

She looked at him for a minute without replying. Then she said: ‘Oh yes.’ 

Poirot asked: ‘Did you like her, Mademoiselle?’ 

Linda said again: ‘Oh yes.’ She added: ‘Arlena was quite kind to me.’ 

Weston said with rather uneasy facetiousness. 

‘Not the cruel stepmother, eh?’ 

Linda shook her head without smiling. 

Weston said: ‘That’s good. That’s good. Sometimes, you know, there’s a bit of difficulty in 
families—jealousy—all that. Girl and her father great pals and then she resents it a bit 
when he’s all wrapped up in the new wife. You didn’t feel like that, eh?’ 

Linda stared at him. She said with obvious sincerity: ‘Oh no.’ 

Weston said: ‘I suppose your father was—er—very wrapped up in her?’ 

Linda said simply: ‘I don’t know.’ 

Weston went on: ‘All sorts of difficulties, as I say, arise in families. Quarrels—rows—that 
sort of thing. If husband and wife get ratty with each other, that’s a bit awkward for a 
daughter too. Anything of that sort?’ 

Linda said clearly: ‘Do you mean, did Father and Arlena quarrel?’ 

‘Well—yes.’ 

Weston thought to himself: ‘Rotten business—questioning a child about her father. Why is 
one a policeman? Damn it all, it’s got to be done, though.’ 

76  



Linda said positively: ‘Oh no.’ She added: ‘Father doesn’t quarrel with people. He’s not like 
that at all.’ 

Weston said: ‘Now, Miss Linda, I want you to think very carefully. Have you any idea at all 
who might have killed your stepmother? Is there anything you’ve ever heard or anything 
you know that could help us on that point?’ 

Linda was silent a minute. She seemed to be giving the question a serious unhurried 
consideration. She said at last. 

‘No, I don’t know who could have wanted to kill Arlena.’ She added: ‘Except, of course, 
Mrs ChristineRedfern.’ 

Weston said: ‘You think Mrs ChristineRedfern wanted to kill her? Why?’ 

Linda said: ‘Because her husband was in love with Arlena. But I don’t think she would 
really want to kill her. I mean she’d just feel that she wished she was dead—and that isn’t 
the same thing at all, is it?’ 

Poirot said gently: ‘No, it is not at all the same.’ 

Linda nodded. A queer sort of spasm passed across her face. She said: ‘And anyway, Mrs 
ChristineRedfern could never do a thing like that—kill anybody. She isn’t—she isn’t violent, if you 
know what I mean.’ 

Weston and Poirot nodded. The latter said: ‘I know exactly what you mean, my child, and I 
agree with you. Mrs ChristineRedfern is not of those who, as your saying goes, “sees red”. She 
would not be’—he leaned back half closing his eyes, picking his words with care—‘shaken 
by a storm of feeling—seeing life narrowing in front of her—seeing a hated face—a hated 
white neck—feeling her hands clench—longing to feel them press into flesh—’ 

He stopped. 

Linda moved jerkily back from the table. She said in a trembling voice: ‘Can I go now? Is 
that all?’ 

Colonel Weston said: ‘Yes, yes, that’s all. Thank you, Miss Linda.’ 

He got up to open the door for her. Then came back to the table and lit a cigarette. 

‘Phew,’ he said. ‘Not a nice job, ours. I can tell you I felt a bit of a cad questioning that 
child about the relations between her father and her stepmother. More or less inviting a 
daughter to put a rope round her father’s neck. All the same, it had to be done. Murder is 
murder. And she’s the person most likely to know the truth of things. I’m rather thankful, 
though, that she’d nothing to tell us in that line.’ 

Poirot said: ‘Yes, I thought you were.’ 

 77



Weston said with an embarrassed cough: ‘By the way, Poirot, you went a bit far, I thought 
at the end. All that hands sinking into flesh business! Not quite the sort of idea to put into 
a kid’s head.’ 

Hercule Poirot looked at him with thoughtful eyes. He said: ‘So you thought I put ideas 
into her head?’ 

‘Well, didn’t you? Come now.’ 

Poirot shook his head. 

Weston sheered away from the point. He said: ‘On the whole we got very little useful stuff 
out of her. Except a more or less complete alibi for the ChristineRedfern woman. If they were 
together from half‐past ten to a quarter to twelve that lets ChristineRedfern  out of it. Exit 
the jealous wife suspect.’ 

Poirot said: ‘There are better reasons than that for leaving Mrs ChristineRedfern out of it. It would, 
I am convinced, be physically impossible and mentally impossible for her to strangle 
anyone. She is cold rather than warm blooded, capable of deep devotion and unswerving 
constancy, but not of hot blooded passion or rage. Moreover, her hands are far too small 
and delicate.’ 

Colgate said: ‘I agree with M. Poirot. She’s out of it. Dr Neasden says it was a full‐sized pair 
of hands that throttled that dame.’ 

Weston said: ‘Well, I suppose we’d better see the PatrickRedferns next. I expect he’s recovered a 
bit from the shock now.’ 

III 

 PatrickRedfern had recovered full composure by now. He looked pale and haggard and 
suddenly very young, but his manner was quite composed. 

‘You are Mr  PatrickRedfern of Crossgates, Seldon, Princes Risborough?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘How long had you known Mrs Marshall?’ 

 PatrickRedfern hesitated, then said: ‘Three months.’ 

Weston went on: ‘Captain KennethMarshall has told us that you and she met casually at a cocktail 
party. Is that right?’ 

‘Yes, that’s how it came about.’ 

Weston said: ‘Captain KennethMarshall has implied that until you both met down here you did not 
know each other well. Is that the truth, Mr PatrickRedfern?’ 

78  



Again  PatrickRedfern hesitated a minute. Then he said: ‘Well—not exactly. As a matter of 
fact I saw a fair amount of her one way and another.’ 

‘Without Captain KennethMarshall’s knowledge?’ 

PatrickRedfern flushed slightly. He said: ‘I don’t know whether he knew about it or not.’ 

Hercule Poirot spoke. He murmured: ‘And was it also without your wife’s knowledge, Mr 
PatrickRedfern?’ 

‘I believe I mentioned to my wife that I had met the famous Arlena Stuart.’ 

Poirot persisted. 

‘But she did not know how often you were seeing her?’ 

‘Well, perhaps not.’ 

Weston said: ‘Did you and Mrs Marshall arrange to meet down here?’ 

PatrickRedfern was silent a minute or two. Then he shrugged his shoulders. 

‘Oh well,’ he said, ‘I suppose it’s bound to come out now. It’s no good my fencing with 
you. I was crazy about the woman—mad—infatuated—anything you like. She wanted me 
to come down here. I demurred a bit and then I agreed. I—I—well, I would have agreed to 
do any mortal thing she liked. She had that kind of effect on people.’ 

Hercule Poirot murmured: ‘You paint a very clear picture of her. She was the eternal Circe. 
Just that!’ 

 PatrickRedfern said bitterly: ‘She turned men into swine all right!’ He went on: ‘I’m being 
frank with you, gentlemen. I’m not going to hide anything. What’s the use? As I say, I was 
infatuated with her. Whether she cared for me or not, I don’t know. She pretended to, but 
I think she was one of those women who lose interest in a man once they’ve got him body 
and soul. She knew she’d got me all right. This morning, when I found her there on the 
beach, dead, it was as though’—he paused—‘as though something had hit me straight 
between the eyes. I was dazed—knocked out!’ 

Poirot leaned forward. ‘And now?’ 

 PatrickRedfern met his eyes squarely. 

He said: ‘I’ve told you the truth. What I want to ask is this—how much of it has got to be 
made public? It’s not as though it could have any bearing on her death. And if it all comes 
out, it’s going to be pretty rough on my wife.’ 

‘Oh, I know,’ he went on quickly. ‘You think I haven’t thought much about her up to now? 
Perhaps that’s true. But, though I may sound the worst kind of hypocrite, the real truth is 

 79



that I care for my wife—care for her very deeply. The other’—he twitched his shoulders—
‘it was a madness—the kind of idiotic fool thing men do—but ChristineRedfern is different. She’s 
real. Badly as I’ve treated her, I’ve known all along, deep down, that she was the person 
who really counted.’ He paused—sighed—and said rather pathetically: ‘I wish I could make 
you believe that.’ 

Hercule Poirot leant forward. He said: ‘But I do believe it. Yes, yes, I do believe it!’ 

 PatrickRedfern looked at him gratefully. He said: ‘Thank you.’ 

Colonel Weston cleared his throat. He said: ‘You may take it, Mr PatrickRedfern, that we shall not 
go into irrelevancies. If your infatuation for Mrs Marshall played no part in the murder 
then there will be no point in dragging it into the case. But what you don’t seem to realize 
is that that—er—intimacy—may have a very direct bearing on the murder. It might 
establish, you understand, a motive for the crime.’ 

 PatrickRedfern said: ‘Motive?’ 

Weston said: ‘Yes, Mr PatrickRedfern, motive! Captain KennethMarshall, perhaps, was unaware of the 
affair. Suppose that he suddenly found out?’ 

PatrickRedfern said: ‘Oh God! You mean he got wise and—and killed her?’ 

The Chief Constable said rather dryly: ‘That solution had not occurred to you?’ 

PatrickRedfern shook his head. He said: ‘No—funny. I never thought of it. You see, KennethMarshall’s 
such a quiet chap. I—oh, it doesn’t seem likely.’ 

Weston asked: ‘What was Mrs Marshall’s attitude to her husband in all this? Was she—
well, uneasy—in case it should come to his ears? Or was she indifferent?’ 

PatrickRedfern said slowly: ‘She was—a bit nervous. She didn’t want him to suspect anything.’ 

‘Did she seem afraid of him?’ 

‘Afraid. No, I wouldn’t say that.’ 

Poirot murmured: ‘Excuse me, M. PatrickRedfern, there was not, at any time, the question of a 
divorce?’ 

 PatrickRedfern shook his head decisively. 

‘Oh no, there was no question of anything like that. There was ChristineRedfern, you see. And 
Arlena, I am sure, never thought of such a thing. She was perfectly satisfied married to 
KennethMarshall. He’s—well, rather a big bug in his way—’ He smiled suddenly. ‘County—all that 
sort of thing, and quite well off. She never thought of me as a possible husband. No, I was 
just one of a succession of poor mutts—just something to pass the time with. I knew that 
all along, and yet, queerly enough, it didn’t alter my feeling towards her...’ 

80  



His voice trailed off. He sat there thinking. 

Weston recalled him to the needs of the moment. 

‘Now, Mr PatrickRedfern, had you any particular appointment with Mrs Marshall this morning?’ 

 PatrickRedfern looked slightly puzzled. 

He said: ‘Not a particular appointment, no. We usually met every morning on the beach. 
We used to paddle about on floats.’ 

‘Were you surprised not to find Mrs Marshall there this morning?’ 

‘Yes, I was. Very surprised. I couldn’t understand it at all.’ 

‘What did you think?’ 

‘Well, I didn’t know what to think. I mean, all the time I thought she would be coming.’ 

‘If she were keeping an appointment elsewhere you had no idea with whom that 
appointment might be?’ 

 PatrickRedfern merely stared and shook his head. 

‘When you had a rendezvous with Mrs Marshall, where did you meet?’ 

‘Well, sometimes I’d meet her in the afternoon down at Gull Cove. You see the sun is off 
Gull Cove in the afternoon and so there aren’t usually many people there. We met there 
once or twice.’ 

‘Never on the other cove?’ Pixy Cove?’ 

‘No. You see Pixy Cove faces west and people go round there in boats or on floats in the 
afternoon. We never tried to meet in the morning. It would have been too noticeable. In 
the afternoon people go and have a sleep or mouch around and nobody knows much 
where any one else is.’ 

Weston nodded. 

 PatrickRedfern went on: ‘After dinner, of course, on the fine nights, we used to go off for 
a stroll together to different parts of the island.’ 

Hercule Poirot murmured: ‘Ah, yes!’ and  PatrickRedfern shot him an inquiring glance. 

Weston said: ‘Then you can give us no help whatsoever as to the cause that took Mrs 
Marshall to Pixy Cove this morning?’ 

 81



PatrickRedfern shook his head. He said, and his voice sounded honestly bewildered: ‘I haven’t the 
faintest idea! It wasn’t like Arlena.’ 

Weston said: ‘Had she any friends down here staying in the neighbourhood?’ 

‘Not that I know of. Oh, I’m sure she hadn’t.’ 

‘Now, Mr PatrickRedfern, I want you to think very carefully. You knew Mrs Marshall in London. 
You must be acquainted with various members of her circle. Is there anyone you know of 
who could have had a grudge against her? Someone, for instance, whom you may have 
supplanted in her fancy?’ 

 PatrickRedfern thought for some minutes. Then he shook his head. 

‘Honestly,’ he said. ‘I can’t think of anyone.’ 

Colonel Weston drummed with his fingers on the table. 

He said at last: ‘Well, that’s that. We seem to be left with three possibilities. That of an 
unknown killer—some mono‐maniac—who happened to be in the neighbourhood—and 
that’s a pretty tall order—’ 

PatrickRedfern said, interrupting: ‘And yet surely, it’s by far the most likely explanation.’ 

Weston shook his head. He said: ‘This isn’t one of the “lonely copse” murders. This cove 
place was pretty inaccessible. Either the man would have to come up from the causeway 
past the hotel, over the top of the island and down by that ladder contraption, or else he 
came there by boat. Either way is unlikely for a casual killing.’ 

 PatrickRedfern said: ‘You said there were three possibilities.’ 

‘Um—yes,’ said the Chief Constable. ‘That’s to say, there were two people on this island 
who had a motive for killing her. Her husband, for one, and your wife for another.’ 

PatrickRedfern stared at him. He looked dumbfounded. He said: ‘My wife? ChristineRedfern? D’you mean 
that ChristineRedfern had anything to do with this?’ 

He got up and stood there stammering slightly in his incoherent haste to get the words 
out. 

‘You’re mad—quite mad—ChristineRedfern? Why, it’s impossible. It’s laughable!’ 

Weston said: ‘All the same, Mr PatrickRedfern, jealousy is a very powerful motive. Women who 
are jealous lose control of themselves completely.’ 

PatrickRedfern said earnestly. 

82  



‘Not ChristineRedfern. She’s—oh she’s not like that. She was unhappy, yes. But she’s not the kind 
of person to—Oh, there’s no violence in her.’ 

Hercule Poirot nodded thoughtfully. Violence. The same word that Linda Marshall had 
used. As before, he agreed with the sentiment. 

‘Besides,’ went on PatrickRedfern confidently. ‘It would be absurd. Arlena was twice as strong 
physically as ChristineRedfern. I doubt if ChristineRedfern could strangle a kitten—certainly not a strong 
wiry creature like Arlena. And then ChristineRedfern could never have got down that ladder to the 
beach. She has no head for that sort of thing. And—oh, the whole thing is fantastic!’ 

Colonel Weston scratched his ear tentatively. 

‘Well,’ he said. ‘Put like that it doesn’t seem likely. I grant you that. But motive’s the first 
thing we’ve got to look for.’ He added: ‘Motive and opportunity.’ 

IV 

When PatrickRedfern had left the room, the Chief Constable observed with a slight smile: ‘Didn’t 
think it necessary to tell the fellow his wife had got an alibi. Wanted to hear what he’d 
have to say to the idea. Shook him up a bit, didn’t it?’ 

Hercule Poirot murmured: ‘The arguments he advanced were quite as strong as any alibi.’ 

‘Yes. Oh! she didn’t do it! She couldn’t have done it—physically impossible as you said. 
KennethMarshall could have done it—but apparently he didn’t.’ 

Inspector Colgate coughed. He said: ‘Excuse me, sir, I’ve been thinking about that alibi. It’s 
possible, you know, if he’d thought this thing out, that those letters were got ready 
beforehand.’ 

Weston said: ‘That’s a good idea. We must look into—’ 

He broke off as ChristineRedfern  entered the room. 

She was, as always, calm and a little precise in manner. She was wearing a white tennis 
frock and a pale blue pullover. It accentuated her fair, rather anaemic prettiness. Yet, 
Hercule Poirot thought to himself, it was neither a silly face nor a weak one. It had plenty 
of resolution, courage and good sense. He nodded appreciatively. 

Colonel Weston thought: ‘Nice little woman. Bit wishy‐washy, perhaps. A lot too good for 
that philandering young ass of a husband of hers. Oh well, the boy’s young. Women 
usually make a fool of you once!’ 

He said: ‘Sit down, Mrs ChristineRedfern. We’ve got to go through a certain amount of routine, you 
see. Asking everybody for an account of their movements this morning. Just for our 
records.’ 

 83



ChristineRedfern ChristineRedfern nodded. 

She said in her quiet precise voice. 

‘Oh yes, I quite understand. Where do you want me to begin?’ 

Hercule Poirot said: ‘As early as possible, Madame. What did you do when you first got up 
this morning?’ 

ChristineRedfern said: ‘Let me see. On my way down to breakfast I went into Linda Marshall’s 
room and fixed up with her to go to Gull Cove this morning. We agreed to meet in the 
lounge at half‐past ten.’ 

Poirot asked: ‘You did not bathe before breakfast, Madame?’ 

‘No. I very seldom do.’ She smiled. ‘I like the sea well warmed before I get into it. I’m 
rather a chilly person.’ 

‘But your husband bathes then?’ 

‘Oh, yes. Nearly always.’ 

‘And Mrs Marshall, she also?’ 

A change came over ChristineRedfern’s voice. It became cold and almost acrid. 

She said: ‘Oh no, Mrs Marshall was the sort of person who never made an appearance 
before the middle of the morning.’ 

With an air of confusion, Hercule Poirot said: ‘Pardon, Madame, I interrupted you. You 
were saying that you went to Miss Linda Marshall’s room. What time was that?’ 

‘Let me see—half‐past eight—no, a little later.’ 

‘And was Miss Marshall up then?’ 

‘Oh yes, she had been out.’ 

‘Out?’ 

‘Yes, she said she’d been bathing.’ 

There was a faint—a very faint note of embarrassment in ChristineRedfern’s voice. It puzzled 
Hercule Poirot. 

Weston said: ‘And then?’ 

‘Then I went down to breakfast.’ 
84  



‘And after breakfast?’ 

‘I went upstairs, collected my sketching box and sketching book and we started out.’ 

‘You and Miss Linda Marshall?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘What time was that?’ 

‘I think it was just on half‐past ten.’ 

‘And what did you do?’ 

‘We went to Gull Cove. You know, the cove on the east side of the island. We settled 
ourselves there. I did a sketch and Linda sunbathed.’ 

‘What time did you leave the cove?’ 

‘At a quarter to twelve. I was playing tennis at twelve and had to change.’ 

‘You had your watch with you?’ 

‘No, as a matter of fact I hadn’t. I asked Linda the time.’ 

‘I see. And then?’ 

‘I packed up my sketching things and went back to the hotel.’ 

Poirot said: ‘And Mademoiselle Linda?’ 

‘Linda?’ Oh, Linda went into the sea.’ 

Poirot said: ‘Were you far from the sea where you were sitting?’ 

‘Well, we were well above high‐water mark. Just under the cliff—so that I could be a little 
in the shade and Linda in the sun.’ 

Poirot said: ‘Did Linda Marshall actually enter the sea before you left the beach?’ 

ChristineRedfern frowned a little in the effort to remember. She said: ‘Let me see. She ran down 
the beach—I fastened my box—Yes, I heard her splashing in the waves as I was on the 
path up the cliff.’ 

‘You are sure of that, Madame? That she really entered the sea?’ 

‘Oh yes.’ 

 85



She stared at him in surprise. 

Colonel Weston also stared at him. 

Then he said: ‘Go on, Mrs ChristineRedfern.’ 

‘I went back to the hotel, changed, and went to the tennis courts where I met the others.’ 

‘Who were?’ 

‘Captain KennethMarshall, Mr Gardener and Miss Darnley. We played two sets. We were just going 
in again when the news came about—about Mrs Marshall.’ 

Hercule Poirot leant forward. He said: ‘And what did you think, Madame, when you heard 
that news?’ 

‘What did I think?’ 

Her face showed a faint distaste for the question. 

‘Yes.’ 

ChristineRedfern  said slowly: ‘It was—a horrible thing to happen.’ 

‘Ah, yes, your fastidiousness was revolted. I understand that. But what did it mean to 
you—personally?’ 

She gave him a quick look—a look of appeal. He responded to it. He said in a matter‐of‐
fact voice. 

‘I am appealing to you, Madame, as a woman of intelligence with plenty of good sense and 
judgment. You had doubtless during your stay here formed an opinion of Mrs Marshall, of 
the kind of woman she was?’ 

ChristineRedfern said cautiously: ‘I suppose one always does that more or less when one is staying 
in hotels.’ 

‘Certainly, it is the natural thing to do. So I ask you, Madame, were you really very 
surprised at the manner of her death?’ 

ChristineRedfern said slowly: ‘I think I see what you mean. No, I was not, perhaps, surprised. 
Shocked, yes. But she was the kind of woman—’ 

Poirot finished the sentence for her. 

‘She was the kind of woman to whom such a thing might happen... Yes, Madame, that is 
the truest and most significant thing that has been said in this room this morning. Laying 

86  



all—er (he stressed it carefully) personal feeling aside, what did you really think of the late 
Mrs Marshall?’ 

ChristineRedfern  said calmly: ‘Is it really worth while going into all that now?’ 

‘I think it might be, yes.’ 

‘Well, what shall I say?’ Her fair skin was suddenly suffused with colour. The careful poise 
of her manner was relaxed. For a short space the natural raw woman looked out. ‘She’s 
the kind of woman that to my mind is absolutely worthless! She did nothing to justify her 
existence. She had no mind—no brains. She thought of nothing but men and clothes and 
admiration. Useless, a parasite! She was attractive to men, I suppose—Oh, of course, she 
was. And she lived for that kind of life. And so, I suppose, I wasn’t really surprised at her 
coming to a sticky end. She was the sort of woman who would be mixed up with 
everything sordid—blackmail—jealousy—violence—every kind of crude emotion. She—
she appealed to the worst in people.’ 

She stopped, panting a little. Her rather short top lip lifted itself in a kind of fastidious 
disgust. It occured to Colonel Weston that you could not have found a more complete 
contrast to Arlena Stuart than ChristineRedfern . It also occurred to him that if you were 
married to ChristineRedfern , the atmosphere might be so rarefied that the Arlena Stuarts 
of this world would hold a particular attraction for you. 

And then, immediately following on these thoughts, a single word out of the words she 
had spoken fastened on his attention with particular intensity. 

He leaned forward and said: ‘Mrs ChristineRedfern, why, in speaking of her, did you mention the 
word blackmail?’ 

 87



88  



Chapter 7 

ChristineRedfern stared at him, not seeming at once to take in what he meant. She answered 
almost mechanically. 

‘I suppose—because she was being blackmailed. She was the sort of person who would 
be.’ 

Colonel Weston said earnestly: ‘But—do you know she was being blackmailed?’ 

A faint colour rose in the girl’s cheeks. She said rather awkwardly: ‘As a matter of fact I do 
happen to know it. I—I overheard something.’ 

‘Will you explain, Mrs ChristineRedfern?’ 

Flushing still more, ChristineRedfern  said: ‘I—I didn’t mean to overhear. It was an 
accident. It was two—no, three nights ago. We were playing bridge.’ She turned towards 
Poirot. ‘You remember? My husband and I, M. Poirot and Miss Darnley. I was dummy. It 
was very stuffy in the card room, and I slipped out of the window for a breath of fresh air. I 
went down towards the beach and I suddenly heard voices. One—it was Arlena 
Marshall’s—I knew it at once—said: “It’s no good pressing me. I can’t get any more money 
now. My husband will suspect something.” And then a man’s voice said: “I’m not taking 
any excuses. You’ve got to cough up.” And then Arlena Marshall said: “You blackmailing 
brute!” And the man said: “Brute or not, you’ll pay up, my lady.” ’ 

ChristineRedfern paused. 

‘I’d turned back and a minute after Arlena Marshall rushed past me. She looked—well, 
frightfully upset.’ 

Weston said: ‘And the man? Do you know who he was?’ 

ChristineRedfern  shook her head. 

She said: ‘He was keeping his voice low. I barely heard what he said.’ 

‘It didn’t suggest the voice to you of anyone you knew?’ 

She thought again, but once more shook her head. She said: ‘No, I don’t know. It was gruff 
and low. It—oh, it might have been anybody’s.’ 

Colonel Weston said: ‘Thank you, Mrs ChristineRedfern.’ 

II 

When the door had closed behind ChristineRedfern  Inspector Colgate said: ‘Now we are 
getting somewhere!’ 

 89



Weston said: ‘You think so, eh?’ 

‘Well, it’s suggestive, sir, you can’t get away from it. Somebody in this hotel was 
blackmailing the lady.’ 

Poirot murmured: ‘But it is not the wicked blackmailer who lies dead. It is the victim.’ 

‘That’s a bit of a setback, I agree,’ said the Inspector. ‘Blackmailers aren’t in the habit of 
bumping off their victims. But what it does give us is this, it suggests a reason for Mrs 
Marshall’s curious behaviour this morning. She’d got a rendezvous with this fellow who 
was blackmailing her, and she didn’t want either her husband or PatrickRedfern to know about 
it.’ 

‘It certainly explains that point,’ agreed Poirot. 

Inspector Colgate went on: ‘And think of the place chosen. The very spot for the purpose. 
The lady goes off in her float. That’s natural enough. It’s what she does every day. She 
goes round to Pixy Cove where no one ever goes in the morning and which will be a nice 
quiet place for an interview.’ 

Poirot said: ‘But yes, I too was struck by that point. It is as you say, an ideal spot for a 
rendezvous. It is deserted, it is only accessible from the land side by descending a vertical 
steel ladder which is not everybody’s money, bien entendu. Moreover most of the beach 
is invisible from above because of the overhanging cliff. And it has another advantage. Mr 
PatrickRedfern told me of that one day. There is a cave on it, the entrance to which is not easy to 
find but where anyone could wait unseen.’ 

Weston said: ‘Of course, the Pixy’s Cave—remember hearing about it.’ 

Inspector Colgate said: ‘Haven’t heard it spoken of for years, though. We’d better have a 
look inside it. Never know, we might find a pointer of some kind.’ 

Weston said: ‘Yes, you’re right, Colgate, we’ve got the solution to part one of the puzzle. 
Why did Mrs Marshall go to Pixy’s Cove? We want the other half of that solution, though. 
Who did she go there to meet? Presumably someone staying in this hotel. None of them 
fitted as a lover—but a blackmailer’s a different proposition.’ 

He drew the register towards him. 

‘Excluding the waiters, boots, etc., whom I don’t think likely, we’ve got the following. The 
American—Gardener, Major Barry, Mr Horace Blatt, and the Reverend Stephen Lane.’ 

Inspector Colgate said: ‘We can narrow it down a bit, sir. We might almost rule out the 
American, I think. He was on the beach all the morning. That’s so, isn’t it, M. Poirot?’ 

Poirot replied: ‘He was absent for a short time when he fetched a skein of wool for his 
wife.’ 

90  



Colgate said: ‘Oh well, we needn’t count that.’ 

Weston said: ‘And what about the other three?’ 

‘Major Barry went out at ten o’clock this morning. He returned at one‐thirty. Mr Lane was 
earlier still. He breakfasted at eight. Said he was going for a tramp. Mr Blatt went off for a 
sail at nine‐thirty same as he does most days. Neither of them are back yet.’ 

‘A sail, eh?’ Colonel Weston’s voice was thoughtful. 

Inspector Colgate’s voice was responsive. He said: ‘Might fit in rather well, sir.’ 

Weston said: ‘Well, we’ll have a word with this Major bloke—and let me see, who else is 
there? Rosamund Darnley. And there’s the Brewster woman who found the body with 
PatrickRedfern. What’s she like, Colgate?’ 

‘Oh, a sensible party, sir. No nonsense about her.’ 

‘She didn’t express any opinions on the death?’ 

The Inspector shook his head. 

‘I don’t think she’ll have anything more to tell us, sir, but we’ll have to make sure. Then 
there are the Americans.’ 

Colonel Weston nodded. He said: ‘Let’s have ’em all in and get it over as soon as possible. 
Never know, might learn something. About the blackmailing stunt if about nothing else.’ 

III 

Mr and Mrs Gardener came into the presence of authority together. 

Mrs Gardener explained immediately. 

‘I hope you’ll understand how it is, Colonel Weston (that is the name, I think?).’ Reassured 
on this point she went on: ‘But this has been a very bad shock to me and Mr Gardener is 
always very, very careful of my health—’ 

Mr Gardener here interpolated: ‘Mrs Gardener,’ he said, ‘is very sensitive.’ 

‘—and he said to me, “Why, Carrie,” he said, “naturally I’m coming right along with you.” 
It’s not that we haven’t the highest admiration for British police methods because we 
have. I’ve been told that British police procedure is most refined and delicate, and I’ve 
never doubted it, and certainly when I once had a bracelet missing at the Savoy Hotel 
nothing could have been more lovely and sympathetic than the young man who came to 
see me about it, and, of course, I hadn’t really lost the bracelet at all, but just mislaid it; 
that’s the worst of rushing about so much, it makes you kind of forgetful where you put 
things—’ Mrs Gardener paused, inhaled gently and started off again. ‘And what I say is, 

 91



and I know Mr Gardener agrees with me, that we’re only too anxious to do anything to 
help the British police in every way. So go right ahead and ask me anything at all you want 
to know—’ 

Colonel Weston opened his mouth to comply with this invitation, but had momentarily to 
postpone speech while Mrs Gardener went on. 

‘That’s what I said, Odell, isn’t it? And that’s so, isn’t it?’ 

‘Yes, darling,’ said Mr Gardener. 

Colonel Weston spoke hastily. 

‘I understand, Mrs Gardener, that you and your husband were on the beach all the 
morning?’ 

For once Mr Gardener was able to get in first. 

‘That’s so,’ he said. 

‘Why, certainly we were,’ said Mrs Gardener. ‘And a lovely peaceful morning it was, just 
like any other morning if you get me, perhaps even more so, and not the slightest idea in 
our minds of what was happening round the corner on that lonely beach.’ 

‘Did you see Mrs Marshall at all today?’ 

‘We did not. And I said to Odell, why wherever can Mrs Marshall have got to this morning? 
I said. And first her husband coming looking for her and then that good‐looking young 
man, Mr PatrickRedfern, and so impatient he was, just sitting there on the beach scowling at 
everyone and everything. And I said to myself why, when he has that nice pretty little wife 
of his own, must he go running after that dreadful woman? Because that’s just what I felt 
she was. I always felt that about her, didn’t I, Odell?’ 

‘Yes, darling.’ 

‘However that nice Captain KennethMarshall came to marry such a woman I just cannot imagine 
and with that nice young daughter growing up, and it’s so important for girls to have the 
right influence. Mrs Marshall was not at all the right person—no breeding at all—and I 
should say a very animal nature. Now if Captain KennethMarshall had had any sense he’d have 
married Miss Darnley, who’s a very very charming woman and a very distinguished one. I 
must say I admire the way she’s gone straight ahead and built up a first‐class business as 
she has. It takes brains to do a thing like that—and you’ve only got to look at Rosamund 
Darnley to see she’s just frantic with brains. She could plan and carry out any mortal thing 
she liked. I just admire that woman more than I can say. And I said to Mr Gardener the 
other day that any one could see she was very much in love with Captain KennethMarshall—crazy 
about him was what I said, didn’t I, Odell?’ 

‘Yes, darling.’ 

92  



‘It seems they knew each other as children, and why now, who knows, it may all come 
right after all with that woman out of the way. I’m not a narrow‐minded woman, Colonel 
Weston, and it isn’t that I disapprove of the stage as such—why, quite a lot of my best 
friends are actresses—but I’ve said to Mr Gardener all along that there was something evil 
about that woman. And you see, I’ve been proved right.’ 

She paused triumphantly. 

The lips of Hercule Poirot quivered in a little smile. His eyes met for a minute the shrewd 
grey eyes of Mr Gardener. 

Colonel Weston said rather desperately: ‘Well, thank you, Mrs Gardener. I suppose there’s 
nothing that either of you has noticed since you’ve been here that might have a bearing 
upon the case?’ 

‘Why no, I don’t think so.’ Mr Gardener spoke with a slow drawl. ‘Mrs Marshall was 
around with young PatrickRedfern most of the time—but everybody can tell you that.’ 

‘What about her husband? Did he mind, do you think?’ 

Mr Gardener said cautiously: ‘Captain KennethMarshall is a very reserved man.’ 

Mrs Gardener confirmed this by saying: ‘Why, yes, he is a real Britisher!’ 

IV 

On the slightly apoplectic countenance of Major Barry various emotions seemed 
contending for mastery. He was endeavouring to look properly horrified but could not 
subdue a kind of shamefaced gusto. 

He was saying in his hoarse, slightly wheezy voice: ‘Glad to help you any way I can. ’Course 
I don’t know anythin’ about it—nothin’ at all. Not acquainted with the parties. But I’ve 
knocked about a bit in my time. Lived a lot in the East, you know. And I can tell you that 
after being in an Indian hill station what you don’t know about human nature isn’t worth 
knowin’.’ 

He paused, took a breath and was off again. 

‘Matter of fact this business reminds me of a case in Simla. Fellow called Robinson, or was 
it Falconer? Anyway he was in the East Wilts, or was it the North Surreys? Can’t remember 
now, and anyway it doesn’t matter. Quiet chap, you know, great reader—mild as milk 
you’d have said. Went for his wife one evening in their bungalow. Got her by the throat. 
She’d been carryin’ on with some feller or other and he’d got wise to it. By Jove, he nearly 
did for her! It was touch and go. Surprised us all! Didn’t think he had it in him.’ 

Hercule Poirot murmured: ‘And you see there an analogy to the death of Mrs Marshall?’ 

‘Well, what I mean to say—strangled, you know. Same idea. Feller suddenly sees red!’ 

 93



Poirot said: ‘You think that Captain KennethMarshall felt like that?’ 

‘Oh, look here, I never said that.’ Major Barry’s face went even redder. ‘Never said 
anything about KennethMarshall. Thoroughly nice chap. Wouldn’t say a word against him for the 
world.’ 

Poirot murmured: ‘Ah, pardon, but you did refer to the natural reactions of a husband.’ 

Major Barry said: ‘Well, I mean to say, I should think she’d been pretty hot stuff. Eh? Got 
young PatrickRedfern on a string all right. And there were probably others before him. But the 
funny thing is, you know, that husbands are a dense lot. Amazin’. I’ve been surprised by it 
again and again. They see a feller sweet on their wife but they don’t see that she’s sweet 
on him! Remember a case like that in Poona. Very pretty woman, Jove, she led her 
husband a dance—’ 

Colonel Weston stirred a little restively. He said: ‘Yes, yes, Major Barry. For the moment 
we’ve just got to establish the facts. You don’t know of anything personally—that you’ve 
seen or noticed that might help us in this case?’ 

‘Well, really, Weston, I can’t say I do. Saw her and young PatrickRedfern one afternoon on Gull 
Cove’—here he winked knowingly and gave a deep hoarse chuckle—‘very pretty it was, 
too. But it’s not evidence of that kind you’re wanting. Ha, ha!’ 

‘You did not see Mrs Marshall at all this morning?’ 

‘Didn’t see anybody this morning. Went over to St Loo. Just my luck. Sort of place here 
where nothin’ happens for months and when it does you miss it!’ 

The Major’s voice held a ghoulish regret. 

Colonel Weston prompted him. 

‘You went to St Loo, you say?’ 

‘Yes, wanted to do some telephonin’. No telephone here and that post‐office place at 
Leathercombe Bay isn’t very private.’ 

‘Were your telephone calls of a very private nature?’ 

The Major winked again cheerfully. 

‘Well, they were and they weren’t. Wanted to get through to a pal of mine and get him to 
put somethin’ on a horse. Couldn’t get through to him, worse luck.’ 

‘Where did you telephone from?’ 

94  



‘Call box in the G.P.O. at St Loo. Then on the way back I got lost—these confounded 
lanes—twistin’ and turnin’ all over the place. Must have wasted an hour over that at least. 
Damned confusing part of the world. I only got back half an hour ago.’ 

Colonel Weston said: ‘Speak to anyone or meet anyone in St Loo?’ 

Major Barry said with a chuckle: ‘Wantin’ me to prove an alibi? Can’t think of anythin’ 
useful. Saw about fifty thousand people in St Loo—but that’s not to say they’ll remember 
seein’ me.’ 

The Chief Constable said: ‘We have to ask these things, you know.’ 

‘Right you are. Call on me at any time. Glad to help you. Very fetchin’ woman, the 
deceased. Like to help you catch the feller who did it. The Lonely Beach Murder—bet you 
that’s what the papers will call it. Reminds me of the time—’ 

It was Inspector Colgate who firmly nipped this latest reminiscence in the bud and 
manoeuvred the garrulous Major out of the door. 

Coming back he said: ‘Difficult to check up on anything in St Loo. It’s the middle of the 
holiday season.’ 

The Chief Constable said: ‘Yes, we can’t take him off the list. Not that I seriously believe 
he’s implicated. Dozens of old bores like him going about. Remember one or two of them 
in my army days. Still—he’s a possibility. I leave all that to you, Colgate. Check what time 
he took the car out—petrol—all that. It’s humanly possible that he parked the car 
somewhere in a lonely spot, walked back here and went to the cove. But it doesn’t seem 
feasible to me. He’d have run too much risk of being seen.’ 

Colgate nodded. 

He said: ‘Of course there are a good many charabancs here today. Fine day. They start 
arriving round about half‐past eleven. High tide was at seven. Low tide would be about 
one o’clock. People would be spread out over the sands and the causeway.’ 

Weston said: ‘Yes. But he’d have to come up from the causeway past the hotel.’ 

‘Not right past it. He could branch off on the path that leads up over the top of the island.’ 

Weston said doubtfully: ‘I’m not saying that he mightn’t have done it without being seen. 
Practically all the hotel guests were on the bathing beach except for Mrs ChristineRedfern and the 
KennethMarshall girl who were down in Gull Cove, and the beginning of that path would only be 
overlooked by a few rooms of the hotel and there are plenty of chances against anyone 
looking out of those windows just at that moment. For the matter of that, I dare say it’s 
possible for a man to walk up to the hotel, through the lounge and out again without 
anyone happening to see him. But what I say is, he couldn’t count on no one seeing him.’ 

Colgate said: ‘He could have gone round to the cove by boat.’ 

 95



Weston nodded. He said: ‘That’s much sounder. If he’d had a boat handy in one of the 
coves nearby, he could have left the car, rowed or sailed to Pixy Cove, done the murder, 
rowed back, picked up the car and arrived back with this tale about having been to St Loo 
and lost his way—a story that he’d know would be pretty hard to disprove.’ 

‘You’re right, sir.’ 

The Chief Constable said: ‘Well, I leave it to you, Colgate. Comb the neighbourhood 
thoroughly. You know what to do. We’d better see Miss Brewster now.’ 

V 

Emily Brewster was not able to add anything of material value to what they already knew. 

Weston said after she had repeated her story: ‘And there’s nothing you know of that could 
help us in any way?’ 

Emily Brewster said shortly: ‘Afraid not. It’s a distressing business. However, I expect you’ll 
soon get to the bottom of it.’ 

Weston said: ‘I hope so, I’m sure.’ 

Emily Brewster said dryly: ‘Ought not to be difficult.’ 

‘Now what do you mean by that, Miss Brewster?’ 

‘Sorry. Wasn’t attempting to teach you your business. All I meant was that with a woman 
of that kind it ought to be easy enough.’ 

Hercule Poirot murmured: ‘That is your opinion?’ 

Emily Brewster snapped out: ‘Of course. De mortuis nil nisi bonum and all that, but you 
can’t get away from facts. That woman was a bad lot through and through. You’ve only got 
to hunt round a bit in her unsavoury past.’ 

Hercule Poirot said gently: ‘You did not like her?’ 

‘I know a bit too much about her.’ In answer to the inquiring looks she went on: ‘My first 
cousin married one of the Erskines. You’ve probably heard that that woman induced old 
Sir Robert when he was in his dotage to leave most of his fortune to her away from his 
own family.’ 

Colonel Weston said: ‘And the family—er—resented that?’ 

‘Naturally. His association with her was a scandal anyway, and on top of that, to leave her 
a sum like fifty thousand pounds shows just the kind of woman she was. I dare say I sound 
hard, but in my opinion the Arlena Stuarts of this world deserve very little sympathy. I 
know of something else too—a young fellow who lost his head about her completely—

96  



he’d always been a bit wild, naturally his association with her pushed him over the edge. 
He did something rather fishy with some shares—solely to get money to spend on her—
and only just managed to escape prosecution. That woman contaminated everyone she 
met. Look at the way she was ruining young PatrickRedfern. No, I’m afraid I can’t have any regret 
for her death—though of course it would have been better if she’d drowned herself, or 
fallen over a cliff. Strangling is rather unpleasant.’ 

‘And you think the murderer was someone out of her past?’ 

‘Yes, I do.’ 

‘Someone who came from the mainland with no one seeing him?’ 

‘Why should any one see him? We were all on the beach. I gather the Marshall child and 
ChristineRedfern  were down on Gull Cove out of the way. Captain KennethMarshall was in his 
room in the hotel. Then who on earth was there to see him except possibly Miss Darnley.’ 

‘Where was Miss Darnley?’ 

‘Sitting up on the cutting at the top of the cliff. Sunny Ledge it’s called. We saw her there, 
Mr PatrickRedfern and I, when we were rowing round the island.’ 

Colonel Weston said: ‘You may be right, Miss Brewster.’ 

Emily Brewster said positively: ‘I’m sure I’m right. When a woman’s neither more nor less 
than a nasty mess, then she herself will provide the best possible clue. Don’t you agree 
with me, M. Poirot?’ 

Hercule Poirot looked up. His eyes met her confident grey ones. He said: ‘Oh, yes—I agree 
with that which you have just this minute said. Arlena Marshall herself is the best, the only 
clue, to her own death.’ 

Miss Brewster said sharply: ‘Well, then!’ 

She stood there, an erect sturdy figure, her cool self‐confident glance going from one man 
to the other. 

Colonel Weston said: ‘You may be sure, Miss Brewster, that any clue there may be in Mrs 
Marshall’s past life will not be overlooked.’ 

Emily Brewster went out. 

VI 

Inspector Colgate shifted his position at the table. He said in a thoughtful voice: ‘She’s a 
determined one, she is. And she’d got her knife into the dead lady, proper, she had.’ 

 97



He stopped a minute and said reflectively: ‘It’s a pity in a way that she’s got a cast‐iron 
alibi for the whole morning. Did you notice her hands, sir? As big as a man’s. And she’s a 
hefty woman—as strong and stronger than many a man, I’d say...’ 

He paused again. His glance at Poirot was almost pleading. 

‘And you say she never left the beach this morning, M. Poirot?’ 

Slowly Poirot shook his head. He said: ‘My dear Inspector, she came down to the beach 
before Mrs Marshall could have reached Pixy Cove and she was within my sight until she 
set off with Mr PatrickRedfern in the boat.’ 

Inspector Colgate said gloomily: ‘Then that washes her out.’ 

He seemed upset about it. 

VII 

As always, Hercule Poirot felt a keen sense of pleasure at the sight of Rosamund Darnley. 

Even to a bare police inquiry into the ugly facts of murder she brought a distinction of her 
own. 

She sat down opposite Colonel Weston and turned a grave and intelligent face to him. 

She said: ‘You want my name and address? Rosamund Anne Darnley. I carry on a 
dressmaking business under the name of Rose Mond Ltd at 622 Brook Street.’ 

‘Thank you, Miss Darnley. Now can you tell us anything that may help us?’ 

‘I don’t really think I can.’ 

‘Your own movements—’ 

‘I had breakfast about nine‐thirty. Then I went up to my room and collected some books 
and my sunshade and went out to Sunny Ledge. That must have been about twenty‐five 
past ten. I came back to the hotel about ten minutes to twelve, went up and got my tennis 
racquet and went out to the tennis courts, where I played tennis until lunch‐time.’ 

‘You were in the cliff recess, called by the hotel Sunny Ledge, from about half‐past ten 
until ten minutes to twelve?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘Did you see Mrs Marshall at all this morning?’ 

‘No.’ 

98  



‘Did you see her from the cliff as she paddled her float round to Pixy Cove?’ 

‘No, she must have gone by before I got there.’ 

‘Did you notice anyone on a float or in a boat at all this morning?’ 

‘No, I don’t think I did. You see, I was reading. Of course I looked up from my book from 
time to time, but as it happened the sea was quite bare each time I did so.’ 

‘You didn’t even notice Mr PatrickRedfern and Miss Brewster when they went round?’ 

‘No.’ 

‘You were, I think, acquainted with Mr KennethMarshall?’ 

‘Captain KennethMarshall is an old family friend. His family and mine lived next door to each other. 
I had not seen him, however, for a good many years—it must be something like twelve 
years.’ 

‘And Mrs Marshall?’ 

‘I’d never exchanged half a dozen words with her until I met her here.’ 

‘Were Captain and Mrs Marshall, as far as you knew, on good terms with each other?’ 

‘On perfectly good terms, I should say.’ 

‘Was Captain KennethMarshall very devoted to his wife?’ 

Rosamund said: ‘He may have been. I can’t really tell you anything about that. Captain 
KennethMarshall is rather old‐fashioned—he hasn’t got the modern habit of shouting matrimonial 
woes upon the housetop.’ 

‘Did you like Mrs Marshall, Miss Darnley?’ 

‘No.’ 

The monosyllable came quietly and evenly. It sounded what it was—a simple statement of 
fact. 

‘Why was that?’ 

A half smile came to Rosamund’s lips. She said: ‘Surely you’ve discovered that Arlena 
Marshall was not popular with her own sex? She was bored to death with women and 
showed it. Nevertheless I should like to have had the dressing of her. She had a great gift 
for clothes. Her clothes were always just right and she wore them well. I should like to 
have had her as a client.’ 

 99



‘She spent a good deal on clothes?’ 

‘She must have done. But then she had money of her own and of course Captain KennethMarshall 
is quite well off.’ 

‘Did you ever hear or did it ever occur to you that Mrs Marshall was being blackmailed, 
Miss Darnley?’ 

A look of intense astonishment came over Rosamund Darnley’s expressive face. 

She said: ‘Blackmailed? Arlena?’ 

‘The idea seems to surprise you.’ 

‘Well, yes, it does rather. It seems so incongruous.’ 

‘But surely it is possible?’ 

‘Everything’s possible, isn’t it? The world soon teaches one that. But I wondered what any 
one could blackmail Arlena about?’ 

‘There are certain things, I suppose, that Mrs Marshall might be anxious should not come 
to her husband’s ears?’ 

‘We‐ll, yes.’ 

She explained the doubt in her voice by saying with a half smile: ‘I sound sceptical, but 
then, you see, Arlena was rather notorious in her conduct. She never made much of a 
pose of respectability.’ 

‘You think, then, that her husband was aware of her—intimacies with other people?’ 

There was a pause. Rosamund was frowning. She spoke at last in a slow, reluctant voice. 
She said: ‘You know, I don’t really know what to think. I’ve always assumed that Kenneth 
 accepted his wife, quite frankly, for what she was. That he had no illusions about 
her. But it may not be so.’ 

‘He may have believed in her absolutely?’ 

Rosamund said with semi‐exasperation: ‘Men are such fools. And Kenneth  is 
unworldly under his sophisticated manner. He may have believed in her blindly. He may 
have thought she was just—admired.’ 

‘And you know of no one—that is, you have heard of no one who was likely to have had a 
grudge against Mrs Marshall?’ 

Rosamund Darnley smiled. She said: ‘Only resentful wives. And I presume, since she was 
strangled, that it was a man who killed her.’ 

100  



‘Yes.’ 

Rosamund said thoughtfully: ‘No, I can’t think of any one. But then I probably shouldn’t 
know. You’ll have to ask someone in her own intimate set.’ 

‘Thank you, Miss Darnley.’ 

Rosamund turned a little in her chair. She said: ‘Hasn’t M. Poirot any questions to ask?’ 

Her faintly ironic smile flashed out at him. 

Hercule Poirot smiled and shook his head. 

He said: ‘I can think of nothing.’ 

Rosamund Darnley got up and went out. 

 101 



102  



Chapter 8 

They were standing in the bedroom that had been Arlena Marshall’s. 

Two big bay windows gave on to a balcony that overlooked the bathing beach and the sea 
beyond. Sunshine poured into the room, flashing over the bewildering array of bottles and 
jars on Arlena’s dressing‐table. 

Here there was every kind of cosmetic and unguent known to beauty parlours. Amongst 
this panoply of woman’s affairs three men moved purposefully. Inspector Colgate went 
about shutting and opening drawers. 

Presently he gave a grunt. He had come upon a packet of folded letters. He and Weston 
ran through them together. 

Hercule Poirot had moved to the wardrobe. He opened the door of the hanging cupboard 
and looked at the multiplicity of gowns and sports suits that hung there. He opened the 
other side. Foamy lingerie lay in piles. On a wide shelf were hats. Two more beach 
cardboard hats in lacquer red and pale yellow—a Big Hawaiian straw hat—another of 
drooping dark‐blue linen and three or four little absurdities for which, no doubt, several 
guiness had been paid apiece—a kind of beret in dark blue—a tuft, no more, of black 
velvet—a pale grey turban. 

Hercule Poirot stood scanning them—a faintly indulgent smile came to his lips. He 
murmured: ‘Les femmes!’ 

Colonel Weston was refolding the letters. 

‘Three from young PatrickRedfern,’ he said. ‘Damned young ass. He’ll learn not to write letters to 
women in a few more years. Women always keep letters and then swear they’ve burnt 
them. There’s one other letter here. Same line of country.’ 

He held it out and Poirot took it. 

Darling Arlena, —God, I feel blue. To be going out to China—and perhaps not 
seeing you again for years and years. I didn’t know any man could go on feeling 
crazy about a woman like I feel about you. Thanks for the cheque. They won’t 
prosecute now. It was a near shave, though, and all because I wanted to make big 
money for you. Can you forgive me? I wanted to set diamonds in your ears—your 
lovely ears—and clasp great milk‐white pearls round your throat, only they say 
pearls are no good nowadays. A fabulous emerald, then? Yes, that’s the thing. A 
great emerald, cool and green and full of hidden fire. Don’t forget me—but you 
won’t, I know. You’re mine—always. 

Goodbye—goodbye—goodbye. 

J.N. 

 103 



Inspector Colgate said: ‘Might be worth while to find out if J.N. really did go to China. 
Otherwise—well, he might be the person we’re looking for. Crazy about the woman, 
idealizing her, suddenly finding out he’d been played for a sucker. It sounds to me as 
though this is the boy Miss Brewster mentioned. Yes, I think this might be useful.’ 

Hercule Poirot nodded. He said: ‘Yes, that letter is important. I find it very important.’ 

He turned round and stared at the room—at the bottles on the dressing‐table—at the 
open wardrobe and at a big Pierrot doll that lolled insolently on the bed. 

They went into Kenneth’s room. 

It was next door to his wife’s but with no communicating door and no balcony. It faced the 
same way and had two windows, but it was much smaller. Between the two windows a 
gilt mirror hung on the wall. In the corner beyond the right‐hand window was the 
dressing‐table. On it were two ivory brushes, a clothes brush and a bottle of hair lotion. In 
the corner by the left‐hand window was a writing‐table. An open typewriter stood on it 
and papers were ranged in a stack beside it. 

Colgate went through them rapidly. 

He said: ‘All seems straightforward enough. Ah, here’s the letter he mentioned this 
morning. Dated the 24th—that’s yesterday. And here’s the envelope postmarked 
Leathercombe Bay this morning. Seems all square. Now we’ll have an idea if he could have 
prepared that answer of his beforehand.’ 

He sat down. 

Colonel Weston said: ‘We’ll leave you to it, for a moment. We’ll just glance through the 
rest of the rooms. Everyone’s been kept out of this corridor until now, and they’re getting 
a bit restive about it.’ 

They went next into Linda Marshall’s room. It faced east, looking out over the rocks down 
to the sea below. 

Weston gave a glance round. He murmured: ‘Don’t suppose there’s anything to see here. 
But it’s possible KennethMarshall might have put something in his daughter’s room that he didn’t 
want us to find. Not likely, though. It isn’t as though there had been a weapon or anything 
to get rid of.’ 

He went out again. 

Hercule Poirot stayed behind. He found something that interested him in the grate. 
Something had been burnt there recently. He knelt down, working patiently. He laid out 
his finds on a sheet of paper. A large irregular blob of candle grease—some fragments of 
green paper or cardboard, possibly a pull‐off calendar for with it was an unburnt fragment 
bearing a large figure 5 and a scrap of printing... noble deeds... There was also an ordinary 
pin and some burnt animal matter which might have been hair. 

104  



Poirot arranged them neatly in a row and stared at them. 

He murmured: ‘Do noble deeds, not dream them all day long. C’est possible. But what is 
one to make of this collection? C’est fantastique! ’ 

And then he picked up the pin and his eyes grew sharp and green. 

He murmured: ‘Pour l’amour de Dieu! Is it possible?’ 

Hercule Poirot got up from where he had been kneeling by the grate. 

Slowly he looked round the room and this time there was an entirely new expression on 
his face. It was grave and almost stern. 

To the left of the mantelpiece there were some shelves with a row of books. Hercule 
Poirot looked thoughtfully along the titles. 

A Bible, a battered copy of Shakespeare’s plays, The Marriage of William Ashe, by Mrs 
Humphry Ward. The Young Stepmother, by Charlotte Yonge. The Shropshire Lad. Eliot’s 
Murder in the Cathedral. Bernard Shaw’s St Joan. Gone With the Wind, by Margaret 
Mitchell. The Burning Court, by Dickson Carr. 

Poirot took out two books. The Young Stepmother and William Ashe, and glanced inside at 
the blurred stamp affixed to the title page. As he was about to replace them, his eye 
caught sight of a book that had been shoved behind the other books. It was a small dumpy 
volume bound in brown calf. 

He took it out and opened it. Very slowly he nodded his head. 

He murmured: ‘So I was right... Yes, I was right. But for the other—is that possible too? 
No, it is not possible, unless...’ 

He stayed there, motionless, stroking his moustaches whilst his mind ranged busily over 
the problem. 

He said again, softly: ‘Unless—’ 

II 

Colonel Weston looked in at the door. 

‘Hullo, Poirot, still there?’ 

‘I arrive. I arrive,’ cried Poirot. 

He hurried out into the corridor. 

The room next to Linda’s was that of the PatrickRedferns. 

 105 



Poirot looked into it, noting automatically the trace of two different individualities—a 
neatness and tidiness which he associated with ChristineRedfern, and a picturesque disorder 
which was characteristic of Refern. Apart from these sidelights on personality the room 
did not interest him. 

Next to it again was Rosamund Darnley’s room, and here he lingered for a moment in the 
sheer pleasure of the owner’s personality. 

He noted the few books that lay on the table next to the bed, the expensive simplicity of 
the toilet set on the dressing‐table. And there came gently to his nostrils the elusive 
expensive perfume that Rosamund Darnley used. 

Next to Rosamund Darnley’s room at the northern end of the corridor was an open 
window leading to a balcony from which an outside stair led down to the rocks below. 

Weston said: ‘That’s the way people go down to bathe before breakfast—that is, if they 
bathe off the rocks as most of them do.’ 

Interest came into Hercule Poirot’s eyes. He stepped outside and looked down. 

Below, a path led to steps cut zigzag leading down the rocks to the sea. There was also a 
path that led round the hotel to the left. He said: ‘One could go down these stairs, go to 
the left round the hotel and join the main path up from the causeway.’ 

Weston nodded. He amplified Poirot’s statement. 

‘One could go right across the island without going through the hotel at all.’ He added: 
‘But one might still be seen from a window.’ 

‘What window?’ 

‘Two of the public bathrooms look out that way—north—and the staff bathroom, and the 
cloakrooms on the ground floor. Also the billiard room.’ 

Poirot nodded. He said: ‘And all the former have frosted glass windows, and one does not 
play billiards on a fine morning.’ 

‘Exactly.’ 

Weston paused and said: ‘If he did it, that’s the way he went.’ 

‘You mean Captain KennethMarshall?’ 

‘Yes. Blackmail, or no blackmail. I still feel it points to him. And his manner—well, his 
manner is unfortunate.’ 

Hercule Poirot said dryly: ‘Perhaps—but a manner does not make a murderer!’ 

106  



Weston said: ‘Then you think he’s out of it?’ 

Poirot shook his head. He said: ‘No, I would not say that.’ 

Weston said: ‘We’ll see what Colgate can make out of the typewriting alibi. In the 
meantime I’ve got the chambermaid of this floor waiting to be interviewed. A good deal 
may depend on her evidence.’ 

The chambermaid was a woman of thirty, brisk, efficient and intelligent. Her answers 
came readily. 

Captain KennethMarshall had come up to his room not long after ten‐thirty. She was then finishing 
the room. He had asked her to be as quick as possible. She had not seen him come back 
but she had heard the sound of the typewriter a little later. She put it at about five 
minutes to eleven. She was then in Mr and Mrs ChristineRedfern’s room. After she had done that 
she moved on to Miss Darnley’s room at the end of the corridor. She could not hear the 
typewriter from there. She went to Miss Darnley’s room, as near as she could say, at just 
after eleven o’clock. She remembered hearing Leathercombe Church strike the hour as 
she went in. At a quarter‐past eleven she had gone downstairs for her eleven o’clock cup 
of tea and ‘snack’. Afterwards she had gone to do the rooms in the other wing of the 
hotel. In answer to the Chief Constable’s question she explained that she had done the 
rooms in this corridor in the following order: 

Miss Linda Marshall’s, the two public bathrooms, Mrs Marshall’s room and private bath, 
Captain KennethMarshall’s room. Mr and Mrs ChristineRedfern’s room and private bath, Miss Darnley’s 
room and private bath. Captain KennethMarshall’s and Miss Marshall’s rooms had no adjoining 
bathrooms. 

During the time she was in Miss Darnley’s room and bathroom she had not heard any one 
pass the door or go out by the staircase to the rocks, but it was quite likely she wouldn’t 
have heard if any one went quietly. 

Weston then directed his questions to the subject of Mrs Marshall. 

No, Mrs Marshall wasn’t one for rising early as a rule. She, Gladys Narracott, had been 
surprised to find the door open and Mrs Marshall gone down at just after ten. Something 
quite unusual, that was. 

‘Did Mrs Marshall always have her breakfast in bed?’ 

‘Oh yes, sir, always. Not very much of it either. Just tea and orange juice and one piece of 
toast. Slimming like so many ladies.’ 

No, she hadn’t noticed anything unusual in Mrs Marshall’s manner that morning. She’d 
seemed quite as usual. 

Hercule Poirot murmured: ‘What did you think of Mrs Marshall, Mademoiselle?’ 

 107 



Gladys Narracott stared at him. She said: ‘Well, that’s hardly for me to say, is it, sir?’ 

‘But yes, it is for you to say. We are anxious—very anxious—to hear your impression.’ 

Gladys gave a slightly uneasy glance towards the Chief Constable, who endeavoured to 
make his face sympathetic and approving, though actually he felt slightly embarrassed by 
his foreign colleague’s methods of approach. He said: ‘Er—yes, certainly. Go ahead.’ 

For the first time Gladys Narracott’s brisk efficiency deserted her. Her fingers fumbled 
with her print dress. She said: ‘Well, Mrs Marshall—she wasn’t exactly a lady, as you might 
say. What I mean is she was more like an actress.’ 

Colonel Weston said: ‘She was an actress.’ 

‘Yes, sir, that’s what I’m saying. She just went on exactly as she felt like it. She didn’t—
well, she didn’t trouble to be polite if she wasn’t feeling polite. And she’d be all smiles one 
minute and then, if she couldn’t find something or the bell wasn’t answered at once or her 
laundry wasn’t back, well, be downright rude and nasty about it. None of us you might say 
liked her. But her clothes were beautiful, and, of course, she was a very handsome lady, so 
it was only natural she should be admired.’ 

Colonel Weston said: ‘I am sorry to have to ask you what I am going to ask you, but it is a 
very vital matter. Can you tell me how things were between her and her husband?’ 

Gladys Narracott hesitated a minute. 

She said: ‘You don’t—it wasn’t—you don’t think as he did it?’ 

Hercule Poirot said quickly: ‘Do you?’ 

‘Oh! I wouldn’t like to think so. He’s such a nice gentleman, Captain KennethMarshall. He couldn’t 
do a thing like that—I’m sure he couldn’t.’ 

‘But you are not very sure—I hear it in your voice.’ 

Gladys Narracott said reluctantly: ‘You do read such things in the papers! When there’s 
jealousy. If there’s been goings on—and, of course, everyone’s been talking about it—
about her and Mr PatrickRedfern, I mean. And Mrs ChristineRedfern such a nice quiet lady! It does seem a 
shame! And Mr PatrickRedfern’s a nice gentleman too, but it seems men can’t help themselves 
when it’s a lady like Mrs Marshall—one who’s used to having her own way. Wives have to 
put up with a lot, I’m sure.’ She sighed and paused. ‘But if Captain KennethMarshall found out 
about it—’ 

Colonel Weston said sharply: ‘Well?’ 

Gladys Narracott said slowly: ‘I did think sometimes that Mrs Marshall was frightened of 
her husband knowing.’ 

108  



‘What makes you say that?’ 

‘It wasn’t anything definite, sir. It was only I felt—that sometimes she was—afraid of him. 
He was a very quiet gentleman but he wasn’t—he wasn’t easy.’ 

Weston said: ‘But you’ve nothing definite to go on? Nothing either of them ever said to 
each other.’ 

Slowly Gladys Narracott shook her head. 

Weston sighed. He went on. 

‘Now, as to letters received by Mrs Marshall this morning. Can you tell us anything about 
those?’ 

‘There were about six or seven, sir. I couldn’t say exactly.’ 

‘Did you take them up to her?’ 

‘Yes, sir. I got them from the office as usual and put them on her breakfast tray.’ 

‘Do you remember anything about the look of them?’ 

The girl shook her head. 

‘They were just ordinary‐looking letters. Some of them were bills and circulars, I think, 
because they were torn up on the tray.’ 

‘What happened to them?’ 

‘They went into the dustbin, sir. One of the police gentlemen is going through that now.’ 

Weston nodded. 

‘And the contents of the waste‐paper baskets, where are they?’ 

‘They’ll be in the dustbin too.’ 

Weston said: ‘H’m—well, I think that is all at present.’ He looked inquiringly at Poirot. 

Poirot leaned forward. 

‘When you did Miss Linda Marshall’s room this morning, did you do the fireplace?’ 

‘There wasn’t anything to do, sir. There had been no fire lit.’ 

‘And there was nothing in the fireplace itself?’ 

 109 



‘No sir, it was perfectly all right.’ 

‘What time did you do her room?’ 

‘About a quarter‐past nine, sir, when she’d gone down to breakfast.’ 

‘Did she come up to her room after breakfast, do you know?’ 

‘Yes, sir. She came up about a quarter to ten.’ 

‘Did she stay in her room?’ 

‘I think so, sir. She came out, hurrying rather, just before half‐past ten.’ 

‘You didn’t go into her room again?’ 

‘No, sir. I had finished with it.’ 

Poirot nodded. He said: ‘There is another thing I want to know. What people bathed 
before breakfast this morning?’ 

‘I couldn’t say about the other wing and the floor above. Only about this one.’ 

‘That is all I want to know.’ 

‘Well, sir, Captain KennethMarshall and Mr PatrickRedfern were the only ones this morning, I think. They 
always go down for an early dip.’ 

‘Did you see them?’ 

‘No, sir, but their wet bathing things were hanging over the balcony rail as usual.’ 

‘Miss Linda Marshall did not bathe this morning?’ 

‘No, sir. All her bathing dresses were quite dry.’ 

‘Ah,’ said Poirot. ‘That is what I wanted to know.’ 

Gladys Narracott volunteered: ‘She does most mornings, sir.’ 

‘And the other three, Miss Darnley, Mrs ChristineRedfern and Mrs Marshall?’ 

‘Mrs Marshall never, sir. Miss Darnley has once or twice, I think. Mrs ChristineRedfern doesn’t 
often bathe before breakfast—only when it’s very hot, but she didn’t this morning.’ 

Again Poirot nodded. Then he asked: ‘I wonder if you have noticed whether a bottle is 
missing from any of the rooms you look after in this wing?’ 

110  



‘A bottle, sir? What kind of a bottle?’ 

‘Unfortunately I do not know. But have you noticed—or would you be likely to notice—if 
one had gone?’ 

Gladys said frankly: ‘I shouldn’t from Mrs Marshall’s room, sir, and that’s a fact. She has 
ever so many.’ 

‘And the other rooms?’ 

‘Well, I’m not sure about Miss Darnley. She has a good many creams and lotions. But from 
the other rooms, yes, I would, sir. I mean if I were to look special. If I were noticing, so to 
speak.’ 

‘But you haven’t actually noticed?’ 

‘No, because I wasn’t looking special, as I say.’ 

‘Perhaps you would go and look now, then.’ 

‘Certainly, sir.’ 

She left the room, her print dress rustling. Weston looked at Poirot. He said: ‘What’s all 
this?’ 

Poirot murmured: ‘My orderly mind, that is vexed by trifles! Miss Brewster, this morning, 
was bathing off the rocks before breakfast, and she says that a bottle was thrown from 
above and nearly hit her. Eh bien, I want to know who threw that bottle and why?’ 

‘My dear man, any one may have chucked a bottle away.’ 

‘Not at all. To begin with, it could only have been thrown from a window on the east side 
of the hotel—that is, one of the windows of the rooms we have just examined. Now I ask 
you, if you have an empty bottle on your dressing‐table or in your bathroom what do you 
do with it? I will tell you, you drop it into the waste‐paper basket. You do not take the 
trouble to go out on your balcony and hurl it into the sea! For one thing you might hit 
someone, for another it would be too much trouble. No, you would only do that if you did 
not want any one to see that particular bottle.’ 

Weston stared at him. 

Weston said: ‘I know that Chief Inspector Japp, whom I met over a case not long ago, 
always says you have a damned tortuous mind. You’re not going to tell me now that 
Arlena Marshall wasn’t strangled at all, but poisoned out of some mysterious bottle with a 
mysterious drug?’ 

‘No, no, I do not think there was poison in that bottle.’ 

 111 



‘Then what was there?’ 

‘I do not know at all. That’s why I am interested.’ 

Gladys Narracott came back. She was a little breathless. She said: ‘I’m sorry, sir, but I can’t 
find anything missing. I’m sure there’s nothing gone from Captain KennethMarshall’s room, or Miss 
Linda Marshall’s room, or Mr and Mrs ChristineRedfern’s room, and I’m pretty sure there’s nothing 
gone from Miss Darnley’s either. But I couldn’t say about Mrs Marshall’s. As I say, she’s got 
such a lot.’ 

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. 

He said: ‘No matter. We will leave it.’ 

Gladys Narracott said: ‘Is there anything more, sir?’ 

She looked from one to the other of them. 

Weston said: ‘Don’t think so. Thank you.’ 

Poirot said: ‘I thank you, no. You are sure, are you not, that there is nothing—nothing at 
all, that you have forgotten to tell us?’ 

‘About Mrs Marshall, sir?’ 

‘About anything at all. Anything unusual, out of the way, unexplained, slightly peculiar, 
rather curious—enfin, something that has made you say to yourself or to one of your 
colleagues: “That’s funny!”?’ 

Gladys said doubtfully: ‘Well, not the sort of thing that you would mean, sir.’ 

Hercule Poirot said: ‘Never mind what I mean. You do not know what I mean. It is true, 
then, that you have said to yourself or to a colleague today, “that is funny!”?’ 

He brought out the three words with ironic detachment. 

Gladys said: ‘It was nothing really. Just a bath being run. And I did pass the remark to Elsie, 
downstairs, that it was funny somebody having a bath round about twelve o’clock.’ 

‘Whose bath, who had a bath?’ 

‘That I couldn’t say, sir. We heard it going down the waste from this wing, that’s all, and 
that’s when I said what I did to Elsie.’ 

‘You’re sure it was a bath? Not one of the hand‐basins?’ 

‘Oh! quite sure, sir. You can’t mistake bath‐water running away.’ 

112  



Poirot displaying no further desire to keep her, Gladys Narracott was permitted to depart. 

Weston said: ‘You don’t think this bath question is important, do you, Poirot? I mean, 
there’s no point to it. No bloodstains or anything like that to wash off. That’s the—’ He 
hesitated. 

Poirot cut in: ‘That, you would say, is the advantage of strangulation! No bloodstains, no 
weapon—nothing to get rid of or conceal! Nothing is needed but physical strength—and 
the soul of a killer!’ 

His voice was so fierce, so charged with feeling, that Weston recoiled a little. 

Hercule Poirot smiled at him apologetically. 

‘No one,’ he said, ‘the bath is probably of no importance. Anyone may have had a bath. 
Mrs ChristineRedfern before she went to play tennis, Captain KennethMarshall, Miss Darnley. As I say, 
anyone. There is nothing in that.’ 

A police constable knocked at the door, and put in his head. 

‘It’s Miss Darnley, sir. She says she’d like to see you again for a minute. There’s something 
she forgot to tell you, she says.’ 

Weston said: ‘We’re coming down—now.’ 

III 

The first person they saw was Colgate. His face was gloomy. 

‘Just a minute, sir.’ 

Weston and Poirot followed him into Mrs Castle’s office. 

Colgate said: ‘I’ve been checking‐up with Heald on this typewriting business. Not a doubt 
of it, it couldn’t be done under an hour. Longer, if you had to stop and think here and 
there. That seems to me pretty well to settle it. And look at this letter.’ 

He held it out. 

‘My dear KennethMarshall—Sorry to worry you on your holiday but an entirely unforseen 
situation has arisen over the Burley and Tender contracts...’ 

‘Etcetera, etcetera,’ said Colgate. ‘Dated the 24th—that’s yesterday. Envelope postmarked 
yesterday evening E.C.1. and Leathercombe Bay this morning. Same typewriter used on 
envelope and in letter. And by the contents it was clearly impossible for KennethMarshall to 
prepare his answer beforehand. The figures arise out of the ones in the letter—the whole 
thing is quite intricate.’ 

 113 



‘H’m,’ said Weston gloomily. ‘That seems to let KennethMarshall out. We’ll have to look 
elsewhere.’ He added: ‘I’ve got to see Miss Darnley again. She’s waiting now.’ 

Rosamund came in crisply. Her smile held an apologetic nuance. 

She said: ‘I’m frightfully sorry. Probably it isn’t worth bothering about. But one does forget 
things so.’ 

‘Yes, Miss Darnley?’ 

The Chief Constable indicated a chair. 

She shook her shapely black head. 

‘Oh, it isn’t worth sitting down. It’s simply this. I told you that I spent the morning lying out 
on Sunny Ledge. That isn’t quite accurate. I forgot that once during the morning I went 
back to the hotel and out again.’ 

‘What time was that, Miss Darnley?’ 

‘It must have been about a quarter‐past eleven.’ 

‘You went back to the hotel, you said?’ 

‘Yes, I’d forgotten my glare glasses. At first I thought I wouldn’t bother and then my eyes 
got tired and I decided to go in and get them.’ 

‘You went straight to your room and out again?’ 

‘Yes. At least, as a matter of fact, I just looked in on Ken—Captain KennethMarshall. I heard his 
machine going and I thought it was so stupid of him to stay indoors typing on such a lovely 
day. I thought I’d tell him to come out.’ 

‘And what did Captain KennethMarshall say?’ 

Rosamund smiled rather shamefacedly. 

‘Well, when I opened the door he was typing so vigorously, and frowning and looking so 
concentrated, that I just went away quietly. I don’t think he even saw me come in.’ 

‘And that was—at what time, Miss Darnley?’ 

‘Just about twenty‐past eleven. I noticed the clock in the hall as I went out again.’ 

IV 

‘And that puts the lid on it finally,’ said Inspector Colgate. ‘The chambermaid heard him 
typing up till five minutes to eleven. Miss Darnley saw him at twenty minutes past, and the 
114  



woman was dead at a quarter to twelve. He says he spent that hour typing in his room, 
and it seems quite clear that he was typing in his room. That washes Captain KennethMarshall 
right out.’ 

He stopped, then looking at Poirot with some curiosity, he asked: ‘M. Poirot’s looking very 
serious over something.’ 

Poirot said thoughtfully: ‘I was wondering why Miss Darnley suddenly volunteered this 
extra evidence.’ 

Inspector Colgate cocked his head alertly. 

‘Think there’s something fishy about it? That it isn’t just a question of “forgetting”?’ 

He considered for a minute or two, then he said slowly: ‘Look here, sir, let’s look at it this 
way. Supposing Miss Darnley wasn’t on Sunny Ledge this morning as she says. That story’s 
a lie. Now suppose that after telling us her story, she finds that somebody saw her 
somewhere else or alternatively that someone went to the Ledge and didn’t find her 
there. Then she thinks up this story quick and comes and tells it to us to account for her 
absence. You’ll notice that she was careful to say Captain KennethMarshall didn’t see her when 
she looked into his room.’ 

Poirot murmured: ‘Yes, I noticed that.’ 

Weston said incredulously: ‘Are you suggesting that Miss Darnley’s mixed up in this? 
Nonsense, seems absurd to me. Why should she be?’ 

Inspector Colgate coughed. 

He said: ‘You’ll remember what the American lady, Mrs Gardener, said. She sort of hinted 
that Miss Darnley was sweet on Captain KennethMarshall. There’d be a motive there, sir.’ 

Weston said impatiently: ‘Arlena Marshall wasn’t killed by a woman. It’s a man we’ve got 
to look for. We’ve got to stick to the men in the case.’ 

Inspector Colgate sighed. He said: ‘Yes, that’s true, sir. We always come back to that, don’t 
we?’ 

Weston went on: ‘Better put a constable on to timing one or two things. From the hotel 
across the island to the top of the ladder. Let him do it running and walking. Same thing 
with the ladder itself. And somebody had better check the time it takes to go on a float 
from the bathing beach to the cove.’ 

Inspector Colgate nodded. 

‘I’ll attend to all that, sir,’ he said confidently. 

 115 



The Chief Constable said: ‘Think I’ll go along to the cove now. See if Phillips has found 
anything. Then there’s that Pixy’s Cave we’ve been hearing about. Ought to see if there 
are any traces of a man waiting in there. Eh, Poirot? What do you think?’ 

‘By all means. It is a possibility.’ 

Weston said: ‘If somebody from outside had nipped over to the island that would be a 
good hiding‐place—if he knew about it. I suppose the locals know?’ 

Colgate said: ‘Don’t believe the younger generation would. You see, ever since this hotel 
was started the coves have been private property. Fishermen don’t go there, or picnic 
parties. And the hotel people aren’t local. Mrs Castle’s a Londoner.’ 

Weston said: ‘We might take PatrickRedfern with us. He told us about it. What about you, M. 
Poirot?’ 

Hercule Poirot hesitated. He said, his foreign intonation very pronounced: ‘Me, I am like 
Miss Brewster and Mrs ChristineRedfern, I do not like to descend perpendicular ladders.’ 

Weston said: ‘You can go round by boat.’ 

Again Hercule Poirot sighed. 

‘My stomach, it is not happy on the sea.’ 

‘Nonsense, man, it’s a beautiful day. Calm as a mill pond. You can’t let us down, you 
know.’ 

Hercule Poirot hardly looked like responding to this British adjuration. But at that 
moment, Mrs Castle poked her ladylike face and elaborate coiffure round the door. 

‘Ay’m sure ay hope ay am not intruding,’ she said. ‘But Mr Lane, the clergyman, you know, 
has just returned. Ay thought you might like to know.’ 

‘Ah yes, thanks, Mrs Castle. We’ll see him right away.’ 

Mrs Castle came a little farther into the room. She said: ‘Ay don’t know if it is worth 
mentioning, but ay have heard that the smallest incident should not be ignored—’ 

‘Yes, yes?’ said Weston impatiently. 

‘It is only that there was a lady and gentleman here about one o’clock. Came over from 
the mainland. For luncheon. They were informed that there had been an accident and that 
under the circumstances no luncheons could be served.’ 

‘Any idea who they were?’ 

116  



‘Ay couldn’t say at all. Naturally no name was given. They expressed disappointment and a 
certain amount of curiosity as to the nature of the accident. Ay couldn’t tell them 
anything, of course. Ay should say, myself, they were summer visitors of the better class.’ 

Weston said brusquely: ‘Ah well, thank you for telling us. Probably not important but quite 
right—er—to remember everything.’ 

‘Naturally,’ said Mrs Castle, ‘ay wish to do my Duty!’ 

‘Quite, quite. Ask Mr Lane to come here.’ 

V 

Stephen Lane strode into the room with his usual vigour. 

Weston said: ‘I’m the Chief Constable of the County, Mr Lane. I suppose you’ve been told 
what has occurred here?’ 

‘Yes—oh yes—I heard as soon as I got here. Terrible... Terrible...’ His thin frame quivered. 
He said in a low voice: ‘All along—ever since I arrived here—I have been conscious—very 
conscious—of the forces of evil close at hand.’ 

His eyes, burning eager eyes, went to Hercule Poirot. 

He said: ‘You remember, M. Poirot? Our conversation some days ago? About the reality of 
evil?’ 

Weston was studying the tall, gaunt figure in some perplexity. He found it difficult to make 
this man out. Lane’s eyes came back to him. The clergyman said with a slight smile: ‘I dare 
say that seems fantastic to you, sir. We have left off believing in evil in these days. We 
have abolished Hell fire! We no longer believe in the Devil! But Satan and Satan’s 
emissaries were never more powerful than they are today!’ 

Weston said: ‘Er—er—yes, perhaps. That, Mr Lane, is your province. Mine is more 
prosaic—to clear up a case of murder.’ 

Stephen Lane said: ‘An awful word. Murder! One of the earliest sins known on earth—the 
ruthless shedding of an innocent brother’s blood...’ He paused, his eyes half closed. Then, 
in a more ordinary voice he said: ‘In what way can I help you?’ 

‘First of all, Mr Lane, will you tell me your own movements today?’ 

‘Willingly. I started off early on one of my usual tramps. I am fond of walking. I have 
roamed over a good deal of the countryside round here. Today I went to St Petrock‐in‐the‐
Combe. That is about seven miles from here—a very pleasant walk along winding lanes, up 
and down the Devon hills and valleys. I took some lunch with me and ate it in a spinney. I 
visited the church—it has some fragments—only fragments alas, of early glass—also a 
very interesting painted screen.’ 

 117 



‘Thank you, Mr Lane. Did you meet anyone on your walk?’ 

‘Not to speak to. A cart passed me once and a couple of boys on bicycles and some cows. 
However,’ he smiled, ‘if you want proof of my statement, I wrote my name in the book at 
the church. You will find it there.’ 

‘You did not see anyone at the church itself—the Vicar, or the verger?’ 

Stephen Lane shook his head. He said: ‘No, there was no one about and I was the only 
visitor. St Petrock is a very remote spot. The village itself lies on the far side of it about half 
a mile farther on.’ 

Colonel Weston said pleasantly: ‘You mustn’t think we’re—er—doubting what you say. 
Just a matter of checking‐up on everybody. Just routine, you know, routine. Have to stick 
to routine in cases of this kind.’ 

Stephen Lane said gently: ‘Oh yes, I quite understand.’ 

Weston went on: ‘Now the next point. Is there anything you know that would assist us at 
all? Anything about the dead woman? Anything that could give us a pointer as to who 
murdered her? Anything you heard or saw?’ 

Stephen Lane said: ‘I heard nothing. All I can tell you is this: that I knew instinctively as 
soon as I saw her that Arlena Marshall was a focus of evil. She was Evil! Evil personified! 
Woman can be man’s help and inspiration in life—she can also be man’s downfall. She can 
drag a man down to the level of the beast. The dead woman was just such a woman. She 
appealed to everything base in a man’s nature. She was a woman such as Jezebel and 
Aholibah. Now—she has been struck down in the middle of her wickedness!’ 

Hercule Poirot stirred. He said: ‘Not struck down—strangled! Strangled, Mr Lane, by a pair 
of human hands.’ 

The clergyman’s own hands trembled. The fingers writhed and twitched. He said, and his 
voice came low and choked: ‘That’s horrible—horrible—Must you put it like that?’ 

Hercule Poirot said: ‘It is the simple truth. Have you any idea, Mr Lane, whose hands those 
were?’ 

The other shook his head. He said: ‘I know nothing—nothing...’ 

Weston got up. He said, after a glance at Colgate to which the latter replied by an almost 
imperceptible nod, ‘Well, we must get on to the Cove.’ 

Lane said: ‘Is that where—it happened?’ 

Weston nodded. 

Lane said: ‘Can—can I come with you?’ 

118  



About to return a curt negative, Weston was forestalled by Poirot. 

‘But certainly,’ said Poirot. ‘Accompany me there in a boat, Mr Lane. We start 
immediately.’ 

 119 



120  



Chapter 9 

For the second time that morning  PatrickRedfern was rowing a boat into Pixy Cove. The 
other occupants of the boat were Hercule Poirot, very pale with a hand to his stomach, 
and Stephen Lane. Colonel Weston had taken the land route. Having been delayed on the 
way he arrived on the beach at the same time as the boat grounded. A police constable 
and a plainclothes sergeant were on the beach already. Weston was questioning the latter 
as the three from the boat walked up and joined him. 

Sergeant Phillips said: ‘I think I’ve been over every inch of the beach, sir.’ 

‘Good, what did you find?’ 

‘It’s all together here, sir, if you’d like to come and see.’ 

A small collection of objects was laid out neatly on a rock. There was a pair of scissors, an 
empty Gold Flake packet, five patent bottle tops, a number of used matches, three pieces 
of string, one or two fragments of newspaper, a fragment of a smashed pipe, four buttons, 
the drumstick bone of a chicken and an empty bottle of sun‐bathing oil. 

Weston looked down appraisingly on the objects. 

‘H’m,’ he said. ‘Rather moderate for a beach nowadays! Most people seem to confuse a 
beach with a public rubbish dump! Empty bottle’s been here some time by the way the 
label’s blurred—so have most of the other things, I should say. The scissors are new, 
though. Bright and shining. They weren’t out in yesterday’s rain! Where were they?’ 

‘Close by the bottom of the ladder, sir. Also this bit of pipe.’ 

‘H’m, probably dropped by someone going up or down. Nothing to say who they belong 
to?’ 

‘No, sir. Quite an ordinary pair of nail scissors. Pipe’s a good quality brier—expensive.’ 

Poirot murmured thoughtfully: ‘Captain KennethMarshall told us, I think, that he had mislaid his 
pipe.’ 

Weston said: ‘KennethMarshall’s out of the picture. Anyway, he’s not the only person who smokes 
a pipe.’ 

Hercule Poirot was watching Stephen Lane as the latter’s hand went to his pocket and 
away again. He said pleasantly: ‘You also smoke a pipe, do you not, Mr Lane?’ 

The clergyman started. He looked at Poirot. 

He said: ‘Yes. Oh yes. My pipe is an old friend and companion.’ Putting his hand into his 
pocket again he drew out a pipe, filled it with tobacco and lighted it. 

 121 



Hercule Poirot moved away to where PatrickRedfern was standing, his eyes blank. 

He said in a low voice: ‘I’m glad—they’ve taken her away...’ 

Stephen Lane asked: ‘Where was she found?’ 

The Sergeant said cheerfully: ‘Just about where you’re standing, sir.’ 

Lane moved swiftly aside. He stared at the spot he had just vacated. 

The Sergeant went on: ‘Place where the float was drawn up agrees with putting the time 
she arrived here at 10.45. That’s going by the tide. It’s turned now.’ 

‘Photography all done?’ asked Weston. 

‘Yes, sir.’ 

Weston turned to PatrickRedfern. 

‘Now then, man, where’s the entrance to this cave of yours?’ 

 PatrickRedfern was still staring down at the beach where Lane had been standing. It was 
as though he was seeing that sprawling body that was no longer there. 

Weston’s words recalled him to himself. 

He said: ‘It’s over here.’ 

He led the way to where a great mass of tumbled‐down rocks were massed picturesquely 
against the cliff side. He went straight to where two big rocks, side by side, showed a 
straight narrow cleft between them. He said: ‘The entrance is here.’ 

Weston said: ‘Here? Doesn’t look as though a man could squeeze through.’ 

‘It’s deceptive, you’ll find, sir. It can just be done.’ 

Weston inserted himself gingerly into the cleft. It was not as narrow as it looked. Inside, 
the space widened and proved to be a fairly roomy recess with room to stand upright and 
to move about. 

Hercule Poirot and Stephen Lane joined the Chief Constable. The other stayed outside. 
Light filtered in through the opening, but Weston had also got a powerful torch which he 
played freely over the interior. 

He observed: ‘Handy place. You’d never suspect it from the outside.’ 

He played the torch carefully over the floor. 

122  



Hercule Poirot was delicately sniffing the air. 

Noticing this, Weston said: ‘Air quite fresh, not fishy or seaweedy, but of course this place 
is well above high water mark.’ 

But to Poirot’s sensitive nose, the air was more than fresh. It was delicately scented. He 
knew two people who used that elusive perfume... 

‘Weston’s torch came to rest. He said: ‘Don’t see anything out of the way in here.’ 

Poirot’s eyes rose to a ledge a little way above his head. He murmured: ‘One might 
perhaps see that there is nothing up there?’ 

Weston said: ‘If there’s anything up there it would have to be deliberately put there. Still, 
we’d better have a look.’ 

Poirot said to Lane: ‘You are, I think, the tallest of us, Monsieur. Could we venture to ask 
you to make sure there is nothing resting on that ledge?’ 

Lane stretched up, but he could not quite reach to the back of the shelf. Then, seeing a 
crevice in the rock, he inserted a toe in it and pulled himself up by one hand. 

He said: ‘Hullo, there’s a box up here.’ 

In a minute or two they were out in the sunshine examining the clergyman’s find. 

Weston said: ‘Careful, don’t handle it more than you can help. May be finger‐prints.’ 

It was a dark‐green tin box and bore the word Sandwiches on it. 

Sergeant Phillips said: ‘Left from some picnic or other, I suppose.’ 

He opened the lid with his handkerchief. 

Inside were small tin containers marked salt, pepper, mustard and two larger square tins 
evidently for sandwiches. Sergeant Phillips lifted the lid of the salt container. It was full to 
the brim. He raised the next one, commenting: ‘H’m, got salt in the pepper one too.’ 

The mustard compartment also contained salt. 

His face suddenly alert, the police sergeant opened one of the bigger square tins. That, 
too, contained the same white crystalline powder. 

Very gingerly, Sergeant Phillips dipped a finger in and applied it to his tongue. 

His face changed. He said—and his voice was excited: ‘This isn’t salt, sir. Not by a long 
way! Bitter taste! Seems to me it’s some kind of drug.’ 

 123 



II 

‘The third angle,’ said Colonel Weston with a groan. 

They were back at the hotel again. 

The Chief Constable went on: ‘If by any chance there’s a dope gang mixed up in this, it 
opens up several possibilities. First of all, the dead woman may have been in with the gang 
herself. Think that’s likely?’ 

Hercule Poirot said cautiously: ‘It is possible.’ 

‘She may have been a drug addict?’ 

Poirot shook his head. 

He said: ‘I should doubt that. She had steady nerves, radiant health, there were no marks 
of hypodermic injections (not that that proves anything. Some people sniff the stuff). No, I 
do not think she took drugs.’ 

‘In that case,’ said Weston, ‘she may have run into the business accidentally, and she was 
deliberately silenced by the people running the show. We’ll know presently just what the 
stuff is. I’ve sent it to Neasden. If we’re on to some dope ring, they’re not the people to 
stick at trifles—’ 

He broke off as the door opened and Mr Horace Blatt came briskly into the room. 

Mr Blatt was looking hot. He was wiping the perspiration from his forehead. His big hearty 
voice billowed out and filled the small room. 

‘Just this minute got back and heard the news! You the Chief Constable? They told me you 
were in here. My name’s Blatt—Horace Blatt. Any way I can help you? Don’t suppose so. 
I’ve been out in my boat since early this morning. Missed the whole blinking show. The 
one day that something does happen in this out‐of‐the‐way spot, I’m not there. Just like 
life, that, isn’t it? Hullo, Poirot, didn’t see you at first. So you’re in on this? Oh well, I 
suppose you would be. Sherlock Holmes v. the local police, is that it? Ha, ha! Lestrade—all 
that stuff. I’ll enjoy seeing you do a bit of fancy sleuthing.’ 

Mr Blatt came to anchor in a chair, pulled out a cigarette case and offered it to Colonel 
Weston, who shook his head. 

He said, with a slight smile: ‘I’m an inveterate pipe smoker.’ 

‘Same here. I smoke cigarettes as well—but nothing beats a pipe.’ 

Colonel Weston said with suddenly geniality: ‘Then light up, man.’ 

Blatt shook his head. 

124  



‘Not got my pipe on me at the moment. But put me wise about all this. All I’ve heard so far 
is that Mrs Marshall was found murdered on one of the beaches here.’ 

‘On Pixy Cove,’ said Colonel Weston, watching him. 

But Mr Blatt merely asked excitedly: ‘And she was strangled?’ 

‘Yes, Mr Blatt.’ 

‘Nasty—very nasty. Mind you, she asked for it! Hot stuff—trés moustarde—eh, M. Poirot? 
Any idea who did it, or mustn’t I ask that?’ 

With a faint smile Colonel Weston said: ‘Well, you know, it’s we who are supposed to ask 
the questions.’ 

Mr Blatt waved his cigarette. 

‘Sorry—sorry—my mistake. Go ahead.’ 

‘You went out sailing this morning. At what time?’ 

‘Left here at a quarter to ten.’ 

‘Was any one with you?’ 

‘Not a soul. All on my little lonesome.’ 

‘And where did you go?’ 

‘Along the coast in the direction of Plymouth. Took lunch with me. Not much wind so I 
didn’t actually get very far.’ 

After another question or two, Weston asked: ‘Now about the Marshalls? Do you know 
anything that might help us?’ 

‘Well, I’ve given you my opinion. Crime passionnel! All I can tell you is, it wasn’t me! The 
fair Arlena had no use for me. Nothing doing in that quarter. She had her own blue‐eyed 
boy! And if you ask me, KennethMarshall was getting wise to it.’ 

‘Have you any evidence for that?’ 

‘Saw him give young PatrickRedfern a dirty look once or twice. Dark horse, KennethMarshall. Looks very 
meek and mild and as though he were half asleep all the time—but that’s not his 
reputation in the City. I’ve heard a thing or two about him. Nearly had up for assault once. 
Mind you, the fellow in question had put up a pretty dirty deal. KennethMarshall had trusted him 
and the fellow had let him down cold. Particularly dirty business, I believe. KennethMarshall went 
for him and half killed him. Fellow didn’t prosecute—too afraid of what might come out. I 
give you that for what it’s worth.’ 

 125 



‘So you think it possible,’ said Poirot, ‘that Captain KennethMarshall strangled his wife?’ 

‘Not at all. Never said anything of the sort. Just letting you know that he’s the sort of 
fellow who could go berserk on occasions.’ 

Poirot said: ‘Mr Blatt, there is reason to believe that Mrs Marshall went this morning to 
Pixy Cove to meet someone. Have you any idea who that someone might be?’ 

Mr Blatt winked. 

‘It’s not a guess. It’s a certainty. PatrickRedfern!’ 

‘It was not Mr PatrickRedfern.’ 

Mr Blatt seemed taken aback. He said hesitatingly: ‘Then I don’t know... No, I can’t 
imagine...’ 

He went on, regaining a little of his aplomb: ‘As I said before, it wasn’t me! No such luck! 
Let me see, couldn’t have been Gardener—his wife keeps far too sharp an eye on him! 
That old ass Barry? Rot! And it would hardly be the parson. Although, mind you, I’ve seen 
his Reverence watching her a good bit. All holy disapproval, but perhaps an eye for the 
contours all the same! Eh? Lot of hypocrites, most parsons. Did you read that case last 
month? Parson and the churchwarden’s daughter! Bit of an eye‐opener.’ 

Mr Blatt chuckled. 

Colonel Weston said coldly: ‘There is nothing you can think of that might help us?’ 

The other shook his head. 

‘No. Can’t think of a thing.’ He added: ‘This will make a bit of a stir, I imagine. The Press 
will be on to it like hot cakes. There won’t be quite so much of this high‐toned 
exclusiveness about the Jolly Roger in future. Jolly Roger indeed. Precious little jollity 
about it.’ 

Hercule Poirot murmured: ‘You have not enjoyed your stay here?’ 

Mr Blatt’s red face got slightly redder. He said: ‘Well, no, I haven’t. The sailing’s all right 
and the scenery and the service and the food—but there’s no matiness in the place, you 
know what I mean! What I say is, my money’s as good as another man’s. We’re all here to 
enjoy ourselves. Then why not get together and do it? All these cliques and people sitting 
by themselves and giving you frosty good‐mornings—and good‐evenings—and yes, very 
pleasant weather. No joy de viver. Lot of stuck‐up dummies!’ 

Mr Blatt paused—by now very red indeed. 

He wiped his forehead once more and said apologetically: ‘Don’t pay any attention to me. 
I get all worked up.’ 

126  



III 

Hercule Poirot murmured: ‘And what do we think of Mr Blatt?’ 

Colonel Weston grinned and said: ‘What do you think of him? You’ve seen more of him 
than I have.’ 

Poirot said softly: ‘There are many of your English idioms that describe him. The rough 
diamond! The self‐made man! The social climber! He is, as you choose to look at it, 
pathetic, ludicrous, blatant! It is a matter of opinion. But I think, too, that he is something 
else.’ 

‘And what is that?’ 

Hercule Poirot, his eyes raised to the ceiling, murmured: ‘I think that he is—nervous!’ 

IV 

Inspector Colgate said: ‘I’ve got those times worked out. From the hotel to the ladder 
down to Pixy Cove three minutes. That’s walking till you are out of sight of the hotel and 
then running like hell.’ 

Weston raised his eyebrows. He said: ‘That’s quicker than I thought.’ 

‘Down ladder to beach one minute and three‐quarters. Up same two minutes. That’s P.C. 
Flint. He’s a bit of an athlete. Walking and taking the ladder in the normal way, the whole 
business takes close on a quarter of an hour.’ 

Weston nodded. He said: ‘There’s another thing we must go into, the pipe question.’ 

Colgate said: ‘Blatt smokes a pipe, so does KennethMarshall, so does the parson. PatrickRedfern smokes 
cigarettes, the American prefers a cigar. Major Barry doesn’t smoke at all. There’s one 
pipe in KennethMarshall’s room, two in Blatt’s, and one in the parson’s. Chambermaid says 
KennethMarshall has two pipes. The other chambermaid isn’t a very bright girl. Doesn’t know how 
many pipes the other two have. Says vaguely she’s noticed two or three about in their 
rooms.’ 

Weston nodded. 

‘Anything else?’ 

‘I’ve checked up on the staff. They all seem quite O.K. Henry, in the bar, checks KennethMarshall’s 
statement about seeing him at ten to eleven. William, the beach attendant, was down 
repairing the ladder on the rocks by the hotel most of the morning. He seems all right. 
George marked the tennis court and then bedded out some plants round by the dining‐
room. Neither of them would have seen anyone who came across the causeway to the 
island.’ 

 127 



‘When was the causeway uncovered?’ 

‘Round about 9.30, sir.’ 

Weston pulled at his moustache. 

‘It’s possible somebody did come that way. We’ve got a new angle, Colgate.’ 

He told of the discovery of the sandwich box in the cave. 

V 

There was a tap on the door. 

‘Come in,’ said Weston. 

It was Captain KennethMarshall. 

He said: ‘Can you tell me what arrangements I can make about the funeral?’ 

‘I think we shall manage the inquest for the day after tomorrow, Captain KennethMarshall.’ 

‘Thank you.’ 

Inspector Colgate said: ‘Excuse me, sir, allow me to return you these.’ 

He handed over the three letters. 

Kenneth smiled rather sardonically. 

He said: ‘Has the police department been testing the speed of my typing? I hope my 
character is cleared.’ 

Colonel Weston said pleasantly. 

‘Yes, Captain KennethMarshall, I think we can give you a clean bill of health. Those sheets take fully 
an hour to type. Moreover you were heard typing them by the chambermaid up till five 
minutes to eleven and you were seen by another witness at twenty minutes past.’ 

Captain KennethMarshall murmured: ‘Really? That all seems very satisfactory!’ 

‘Yes. Miss Darnley came to your room at twenty minutes past eleven. You were so busy 
typing that you did not observe her entry.’ 

Kenneth’s face took on an impassive expression. He said: ‘Does Miss Darnley say 
that?’ He paused. ‘As a matter of fact she is wrong. I did see her, though she may not be 
aware of the fact. I saw her in the mirror.’ 

128  



Poirot murmured: ‘But you did not interrupt your typing?’ 

KennethMarshall said shortly: ‘No. I wanted to get finished.’ 

He paused a minute, then, in an abrupt voice, he said: ‘Nothing more I can do for you?’ 

‘No, thank you, Captain KennethMarshall.’ 

Kenneth nodded and went out. 

Weston said with a sigh: ‘There goes our most hopeful suspect—cleared! Hullo, here’s 
Neasden.’ 

The doctor came in with a trace of excitement in his manner. He said: ‘That’s a nice little 
death lot you sent me along.’ 

‘What is it?’ 

‘What is it? Diamorphine Hydrochloride. Stuff that’s usually called Heroin.’ 

Inspector Colgate whistled. He said: ‘Now we’re getting places, all right! Depend upon it, 
this dope stunt is at the bottom of the whole business.’ 

 129 



130  



Chapter 10 

The little crowd of people flocked out of the Red Bull. The brief inquest was over—
adjourned for a fortnight. 

Rosamund Darnley joined Captain KennethMarshall. She said in a low voice: ‘That wasn’t so bad, 
was it, Ken?’ 

He did not answer at once. Perhaps he was conscious of the staring eyes of the villagers, 
the fingers that nearly pointed to him and only just did not quite do so! 

‘That’s ’im, my dear.’ ‘See, that’s ’er ’usband.’ ‘That be the ’usband.’ ‘Look, there ’e goes...’ 

The murmurs were not loud enough to reach his ears, but he was none the less sensitive 
to them. This was the modern‐day pillory. The Press he had already encountered—self‐
confident, persuasive young men, adept at battering down his wall of silence of ‘Nothing 
to say’ that he had endeavoured to erect. Even the curt monosyllables that he had 
uttered, thinking that they at least could not lead to misapprehension, had reappeared in 
his morning’s papers in a totally different guise. ‘Asked whether he agreed that the 
mystery of his wife’s death could only be explained on the assumption that a homicidal 
murderer had found his way on to the island, Captain KennethMarshall declared that—’ and so on 
and so forth. 

Cameras had clicked ceaselessly. Now, at this minute, the well‐known sound caught his 
ear. He half turned—a smiling young man was nodding cheerfully, his purpose 
accomplished. 

Rosamund murmured: ‘Captain KennethMarshall and a friend leaving the Red Bull after the 
inquest.’ 

KennethMarshall winced. 

Rosamund said: ‘It’s no use, Ken! You’ve got to face it! I don’t mean just the fact of 
Arlena’s death—I mean all the attendant beastliness. The staring eyes and gossiping 
tongues, the fatuous interviews in the papers—and the best way to meet it is to find it 
funny! Come out with all the old inane cliches and curl a sardonic lip at them.’ 

He said: ‘Is that your way?’ 

‘Yes.’ She paused. ‘It isn’t yours, I know. Protective colouring is your line. Remain rigidly 
non‐active and fade into the background! But you can’t do that here—you’ve no 
background to fade into. You stand out clear for all to see—like a striped tiger against a 
white backcloth. The husband of the murdered woman! ’ 

‘For God’s sake, Rosamund—’ 

She said gently: ‘My dear, I’m trying to be good for you!’ 

 131 



They walked for a few steps in silence. Then KennethMarshall said in a different voice: ‘I know you 
are. I’m not really ungrateful, Rosamund.’ 

They had progressed beyond the limits of the village. Eyes followed them but there was no 
one very near. Rosamund Darnley’s voice dropped as she repeated a variant of her first 
remark. 

‘It didn’t really go so badly, did it?’ 

He was silent for a moment, then he said: ‘I don’t know.’ 

‘What do the police think?’ 

‘They’re non‐committal.’ 

After a minute Rosamund said: ‘That little man—Poirot—is he really taking an active 
interest!’ 

Kenneth  said: ‘Seemed to be sitting in the Chief Constable’s pocket all right the 
other day.’ 

‘I know—but is he doing anything?’ 

‘How the hell should I know, Rosamund?’ 

She said thoughtfully: ‘He’s pretty old. Probably more or less ga ga.’ 

‘Perhaps.’ 

They came to the causeway. Opposite them, serene in the sun, lay the island. 

Rosamund said suddenly: ‘Sometimes—things seem unreal. I can’t believe, this minute, 
that it ever happened...’ 

KennethMarshall said slowly: ‘I think I know what you mean. Nature is so regardless! One ant the 
less—that’s all it is in Nature!’ 

Rosamund said: ‘Yes—and that’s the proper way to look at it really.’ 

He gave her one very quick glance. Then he said in a low voice: ‘Don’t worry, my dear. It’s 
all right. It’s all right.’ 

II 

Linda came down to the causeway to meet them. She moved with the spasmodic jerkiness 
of a nervous colt. Her young face was marred by deep black shadows under her eyes. Her 
lips were dry and rough. 

132  



She said breathlessly: ‘What happened—what—what did they say?’ 

Her father said abruptly: ‘Inquest adjourned for a fortnight.’ 

‘That means they—they haven’t decided?’ 

‘Yes. More evidence is needed.’ 

‘But—but what do they think?’ 

KennethMarshall smiled a little in spite of himself. 

‘Oh, my dear child—who knows? And whom do you mean by they? The coroner, the jury, 
the police, the newspaper reporters, the fishing folk of Leathercombe Bay?’ 

Linda said slowly: ‘I suppose I mean—the police.’ 

KennethMarshall said dryly: ‘Whatever the police think, they’re not giving it away at present.’ 

His lips closed tightly after the sentence. He went into the hotel. 

As Rosamund Darnley was about to follow suit, Linda said: ‘Rosamund!’ 

Rosamund turned. The mute appeal in the girl’s unhappy face touched her. She linked her 
arm through Linda’s and together they walked away from the hotel, taking the path that 
led to the extreme end of the island. 

Rosamund said gently: ‘Try not to mind so much, Linda. I know it’s all very terrible and a 
shock and all that, but it’s no use brooding over these things. And it can be only the—
horror of it, that is worrying you. You weren’t in the least fond of Arlena, you know.’ 

She felt the tremor that ran through the girl’s body as Linda answered: ‘No, I wasn’t fond 
of her...’ 

Rosamund went on: ‘Sorrow for a person is different—one can’t put that behind one. But 
one can get over shock and horror by just not letting your mind dwell on it all the time.’ 

Linda said sharply: ‘You don’t understand.’ 

‘I think I do, my dear.’ 

Linda shook her head. 

‘No, you don’t. You don’t understand in the least—and ChristineRedfern doesn’t understand 
either! Both of you have been nice to me, but you can’t understand what I’m feeling. You 
just think it’s morbid—that I’m dwelling on it all when I needn’t.’ 

She paused. 

 133 



‘But it isn’t that at all. If you knew what I know—’ 

Rosamund stopped dead. Her body did not tremble—on the contrary it stiffened. She 
stood for a minute or two, then she disengaged her arm from Linda’s. 

She said: ‘What is it that you know, Linda?’ 

The girl gazed at her. Then she shook her head. 

She muttered: ‘Nothing.’ 

Rosamund caught her by the arm. The grip hurt and Linda winced slightly. 

Rosamund said: ‘Be careful, Linda. Be damned careful.’ 

Linda had gone dead white. 

She said: ‘I am very careful—all the time.’ 

Rosamund said urgently: ‘Listen, Linda, what I said a minute or two ago applies just the 
same—only a hundred times more so. Put the whole business out of your mind. Never 
think about it. Forget—forget... You can if you try! Arlena is dead and nothing can bring 
her back to life... Forget everything and live in the future. And above all, hold your 
tongue.’ 

Linda shrank a little. She said: ‘You—you seem to know all about it?’ 

Rosamund said energetically: ‘I don’t know anything! In my opinion a wandering maniac 
got on to the island and killed Arlena. That’s much the most probable solution. I’m fairly 
sure that the police will have to accept that in the end. That’s what must have happened! 
That’s what did happen!’ 

Linda said: ‘If Father—’ 

Rosamund interrupted her. 

‘Don’t talk about it.’ 

Linda said: ‘I’ve got to say one thing. My mother—’ 

‘Well, what about her?’ 

‘She—she was tried for murder, wasn’t she?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

Linda said slowly: ‘And then Father married her. That looks, doesn’t it, as though Father 
didn’t really think murder was very wrong—not always, that is.’ 
134  



Rosamund said sharply: ‘Don’t say things like that—even to me! The police haven’t got 
anything against your father. He’s got an alibi—an alibi that they can’t break. He’s 
perfectly safe.’ 

Linda whispered: ‘Did they think at first that Father—?’ 

Rosamund cried: ‘I don’t know what they thought! But they know now that he couldn’t 
have done it. Do you understand? He couldn’t have done it.’ 

She spoke with authority, her eyes commanded Linda’s acquiescence. The girl uttered a 
long fluttering sigh. 

Rosamund said: ‘You’ll be able to leave here soon. You’ll forget everything—everything!’ 

Linda said with sudden unexpected violence. 

‘I shall never forget.’ 

She turned abruptly and ran back to the hotel. Rosamund stared after her. 

III 

‘There is something I want to know, Madame?’ 

ChristineRedfern  glanced up at Poirot in a slightly abstracted manner. She said: ‘Yes?’ 

Hercule Poirot took very little notice of her abstraction. He had noted the way her eyes 
followed her husband’s figure where he was pacing up and down on the terrace outside 
the bar, but for the moment he had no interest in purely conjugal problems. He wanted 
information. 

He said: ‘Yes, Madame. It was a phrase—a chance phrase of yours the other day which 
roused my attention.’ 

ChristineRedfern, her eyes still on PatrickRedfern, said: ‘Yes? What did I say?’ 

‘It was in answer to a question from the Chief Constable. You described how you went into 
Miss Linda Marshall’s room on the morning of the crime and how you found her absent 
from it and how she returned there, and it was then that the Chief Constable asked you 
where she had been.’ 

ChristineRedfern said rather impatiently: ‘And I said she had been bathing? Is that it?’ 

‘Ah, but you did not say quite that. You did not say “she had been bathing”. Your words 
were, “she said she had been bathing”.’ 

ChristineRedfern said: ‘It’s the same thing, surely.’ 

 135 



‘No, it is not the same! The form of your answer suggests a certain attitude of mind on 
your part. Linda Marshall came into the room—she was wearing a bathing‐wrap and yet—
for some reason—you did not at once assume she had been bathing. That is shown by 
your words, “she said she had been bathing”. What was there about her appearance—was 
it her manner, or something that she was wearing or something she said—that led you to 
feel surprised when she said she had been bathing?’ 

ChristineRedfern’s attention left PatrickRedfern and focused itself entirely on Poirot. 

She was interested. She said: ‘That’s clever of you. It’s quite true, now I remember... I was, 
just faintly, surprised when Linda said she had been bathing.’ 

‘But why, Madame, why?’ 

‘Yes, why? That’s just what I’m trying to remember. Oh yes, I think it was the parcel in her 
hand.’ 

‘She had a parcel?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘You do not know what was in it?’ 

‘Oh yes, I do. The string broke. It was loosely done up in the way they do in the village. It 
was candles—they were scattered on the floor. I helped her to pick them up.’ 

‘Ah,’ said Poirot. ‘Candles.’ 

ChristineRedfern stared at him. She said: ‘You seem excited, M. Poirot.’ 

Poirot asked: ‘Did Linda say why she had bought candles?’ 

ChristineRedfern reflected. 

‘No, I don’t think she did. I suppose it was to read by at night—perhaps the electric light 
wasn’t good.’ 

‘On the contrary, Madame, there was a bedside electric lamp in perfect order.’ 

ChristineRedfern said: ‘Then I don’t know what she wanted them for.’ 

Poirot said: ‘What was her manner—when the string broke and the candles fell out of the 
parcel?’ 

ChristineRedfern said slowly: ‘She was—upset—embarrassed.’ 

Poirot nodded his head. Then he asked: ‘Did you notice a calendar in her room?’ 

136  



‘A calendar? What kind of a calendar?’ 

Poirot said: ‘Possibly a green calendar—with tear‐off leaves.’ 

ChristineRedfern screwed up her eyes in an effort of memory. 

‘A green calendar—rather a bright green. Yes, I have seen a calendar like that—but I can’t 
remember where. It may have been in Linda’s room, but I can’t be sure.’ 

‘But you have definitely seen such a thing.’ 

‘Yes.’ 

Again Poirot nodded. 

ChristineRedfern said rather sharply: ‘What are you hinting at, M. Poirot? What is the meaning of 
all this?’ 

For answer Poirot produced a small volume bound in faded brown calf. He said: ‘Have you 
ever seen this before?’ 

‘Why—I think—I’m not sure—yes, Linda was looking into it in the village lending library 
the other day. But she shut it up and thrust it back quickly when I came up to her. It made 
me wonder what it was.’ 

Silently Poirot displayed the title. 

A History of Witchcraft, Sorcery and of the Compounding of Untraceable Poisons. 

ChristineRedfern said: ‘I don’t understand. What does all this mean?’ 

Poirot said gravely. 

‘It may mean, Madame, a good deal.’ 

She looked at him inquiringly, but he did not go on. Instead he asked: ‘One more question, 
Madame, did you take a bath that morning before you went out to play tennis?’ 

ChristineRedfern stared again. 

‘A bath? No. I would have had no time and, anyway, I didn’t want a bath—not before 
tennis. I might have had one after.’ 

‘Did you use your bathroom at all when you came in?’ 

‘I sponged my face and hands, that’s all.’ 

‘You did not turn on the bath at all?’ 
 137 



‘No, I’m sure I didn’t.’ 

Poirot nodded. He said: ‘It is of no importance.’ 

IV 

Hercule Poirot stood by the table where Mrs Gardener was wrestling with a jig‐saw. 

She looked up and jumped. 

‘Why, M. Poirot, how very quietly you came up beside me! I never heard you. Have you 
just come back from the inquest? You know, the very thought of that inquest makes me so 
nervous, I don’t know what to do. That’s why I’m doing this puzzle. I just felt I couldn’t sit 
outside on the beach as usual. As Mr Gardener knows, when my nerves are all upset, 
there’s nothing like one of these puzzles for calming me. There now, where does this 
white piece fit in? It must be part of the fur rug, but I don’t seem to see...’ 

Gently Poirot’s hand took the piece from her. He said: ‘It fits, Madame, here. It is part of 
the cat.’ 

‘It can’t be. It’s a black cat.’ 

‘A black cat, yes, but you see the tip of the black cat’s tail happens to be white.’ 

‘Why, so it does! How clever of you! But I do think the people who make puzzles are kind 
of mean. They just go out of their way to deceive you.’ 

She fitted in another piece and then resumed. 

‘You know, M. Poirot, I’ve been watching you this last day or two. I just wanted to watch 
you detecting if you know what I mean—not that it doesn’t sound rather heartless put like 
that, as though it were all a game—and a poor creature killed. Oh dear, every time I think 
of it I get the shivers! I told Mr Gardener this morning I’d just got to get away from here, 
and now the inquest’s over he thinks we’ll be able to leave tomorrow, and that’s a 
blessing, I’m sure. But about detecting, I would so like to know your methods—you know, 
I’d feel privileged if you’d just explain it to me.’ 

Hercule Poirot said: ‘It is a little like your puzzle, Madame. One assembles the pieces. It is 
like a mosaic—many colours and patterns—and every strange‐shaped little piece must be 
fitted into its own place.’ 

‘Now isn’t that interesting? Why, I’m sure you explain it just too beautifully.’ 

Poirot went on: ‘And sometimes it is like that piece of your puzzle just now. One arranges 
very methodically the pieces of the puzzle—one sorts the colours—and then perhaps a 
piece of one colour that should fit in with—say, the fur rug, fits in instead in a black cat’s 
tail.’ 

138  



‘Why, if that doesn’t sound too fascinating! And are there a great many pieces, M. Poirot?’ 

‘Yes, Madame. Almost everyone here in this hotel has given me a piece for my puzzle. You 
amongst them.’ 

‘Me?’ Mrs Gardener’s tone was shrill. 

‘Yes, a remark of yours, Madame, was exceedingly helpful. I might say it was illuminating.’ 

‘Well, if that isn’t too lovely! Can’t you tell me some more, M. Poirot?’ 

‘Ah! Madame, I reserve the explanations for the last chapter.’ 

Mrs Gardener murmured: ‘If that isn’t just too bad!’ 

V 

Hercule Poirot tapped gently on the door of Captain KennethMarshall’s room. 

Inside there was the sound of a typewriter. 

A curt ‘Come in’ came from the room and Poirot entered. 

Captain KennethMarshall’s back was turned to him. He was sitting typing at the table between the 
windows. He did not turn his head but his eyes met Poirot’s in the mirror that hung on the 
wall directly in front of him. He said irritably: ‘Well, M. Poirot, what is it?’ 

Poirot said quickly: ‘A thousand apologies for intruding. You are busy?’ 

KennethMarshall said shortly: ‘I am rather.’ 

Poirot said: ‘It is one little question that I would like to ask you.’ 

KennethMarshall said: ‘My God, I’m sick of answering questions. I’ve answered the police 
questions. I don’t feel called upon to answer yours.’ 

Poirot said: ‘Mine is a very simple one. Only this. On the morning of your wife’s death, did 
you have a bath after you finished typing and before you went out to play tennis?’ 

‘A bath? No, of course I didn’t! I’d had a bathe only an hour earlier!’ 

Hercule Poirot said: ‘Thank you. That is all.’ 

‘But look here. Oh—’ the other paused irresolutely. 

Poirot withdrew, gently closing the door. 

Kenneth said: ‘The fellow’s crazy!’ 
 139 



VI 

Just outside the bar Poirot encountered Mr Gardener. He was carrying two cocktails and 
was clearly on his way to where Mrs Gardener was ensconced with her jig‐saw. 

He smiled at Poirot in genial fashion. 

‘Care to join us, M. Poirot?’ 

Poirot shook his head. He said: ‘What did you think of the inquest, Mr Gardener?’ 

Mr Gardener lowered his voice. He said: ‘Seemed kind of indeterminate to me. Your 
police, I gather, have got something up their sleeves.’ 

‘It is possible,’ said Hercule Poirot. 

Mr Gardener lowered his voice still further. 

‘I shall be glad to get Mrs Gardener away. She’s a very, very sensitive woman, and this 
affair has got on her nerves. She’s very highly strung.’ 

Hercule Poirot said: ‘Will you permit me, Mr Gardener, to ask you one question?’ 

‘Why, certainly, M. Poirot. Delighted to assist in any way I can.’ 

Hercule Poirot said: ‘You are a man of the world—a man, I think, of considerable acumen. 
What, frankly, was your opinion of the late Mrs Marshall?’ 

Mr Gardener’s eyebrows rose in surprise. He glanced cautiously round and lowered his 
voice. 

‘Well, M. Poirot, I’ve heard a few things that have been kind of going around, if you get 
me, especially among the women.’ Poirot nodded. ‘But if you ask me I’ll tell you my candid 
opinion and that is that that woman was pretty much of a darned fool!’ 

Hercule Poirot said thoughtfully: ‘Now that is very interesting.’ 

VII 

Rosamund Darnley said: ‘So it’s my turn, is it?’ 

‘Pardon?’ 

She laughed. ‘The other day the Chief Constable held his inquisition. You sat by. Today, I 
think, you are conducting your own unofficial inquiry. I’ve been watching you. First Mrs 
ChristineRedfern, then I caught a glimpse of you through the lounge window where Mrs Gardener 
is doing her hateful jig‐saw puzzle. Now it’s my turn.’ 

140  



Hercule Poirot sat down beside her. They were on Sunny Ledge. Below them the sea 
showed a deep‐glowing green. Farther out it was a pale dazzling blue. 

Poirot said: ‘You are very intelligent, Mademoiselle. I have thought so ever since I arrived 
here. It would be a pleasure to discuss this business with you.’ 

Rosamund Darnley said softly: ‘You want to know what I think about the whole thing?’ 

‘It would be most interesting.’ 

Rosamund said: ‘I think it’s really very simple. The clue is in the woman’s past.’ 

‘The past? Not the present?’ 

‘Oh! not necessarily the very remote past. I look at it like this. Arlena Marshall was 
attractive, fatally attractive, to men. It’s possible, I think, that she also tired of them rather 
quickly. Amongst her—followers, shall we say—was one who resented that. Oh, don’t 
misunderstand me, it won’t be someone who sticks out a mile. Probably some tepid little 
man, vain and sensitive—the kind of man who broods. I think he followed her down here, 
waited his opportunity and killed her.’ 

‘You mean that he was an outsider, that he came from the mainland?’ 

‘Yes. He probably hid in that cave until he got his chance.’ 

Poirot shook his head. He said: ‘Would she go there to meet such a man as you describe? 
No, she would laugh and not go.’ 

Rosamund said: ‘She mayn’t have known she was going to meet him. He may have sent 
her a message in some other person’s name.’ 

Poirot murmured: ‘That is possible.’ 

Then he said: ‘But you forget one thing, Mademoiselle. A man bent on murder could not 
risk coming in broad daylight across the causeway and past the hotel. Someone might 
have seen him.’ 

‘They might have—but I don’t think that it’s certain. I think it’s quite possible that he could 
have come without anyone noticing him at all.’ 

‘It would be possible, yes, that I grant you. But the point is that he could not count on that 
possibility.’ 

Rosamund said: ‘Aren’t you forgetting something? The weather.’ 

‘The weather?’ 

 141 



‘Yes. The day of the murder was a glorious day, but the day before, remember, there was 
rain and thick mist. Anyone could come on to the island then without being seen. He had 
only to go down to the beach and spend the night in the cave. That mist, M. Poirot, is 
important.’ 

Poirot looked at her thoughtfully for a minute or two. He said: ‘You know, there is a good 
deal in what you have just said.’ 

Rosamund flushed. She said: ‘That’s my theory, for what it is worth. Now tell me yours.’ 

‘Ah,’ said Hercule Poirot. He stared down at the sea. 

‘Eh bien, Mademoiselle. I am a very simple person. I always incline to the belief that the 
most likely person committed the crime. At the very beginning it seemed to me that one 
person was very clearly indicated.’ 

Rosamund’s voice hardened a little. She said: ‘Go on.’ 

Hercule Poirot went on. 

‘But you see, there is what you call a snag in the way! It seems that it was impossible for 
that person to have committed the crime.’ 

He heard the quick expulsion of her breath. She said rather breathlessly: ‘Well?’ 

Hercule Poirot shrugged his shoulders. 

‘Well, what do we do about it? That is my problem.’ He paused and then went on. ‘May I 
ask you a question?’ 

‘Certainly.’ 

She faced him, alert and vigilant. But the question that came was an unexpected one. 

‘When you came in to change for tennis that morning, did you have a bath?’ 

Rosamund stared at him. 

‘A bath? What do you mean?’ 

‘That is what I mean. A bath! The receptacle of porcelain, one turns the taps and fills it, 
one gets in, one gets out and ghoosh—ghoosh—ghoosh, the water goes down the waste‐
pipe!’ 

‘M. Poirot, are you quite mad?’ 

‘No, I am extremely sane.’ 

142  



‘Well, anyway, I didn’t take a bath.’ 

‘Ha!’ said Poirot. ‘So nobody took a bath. That is extremely interesting.’ 

‘But why should anyone take a bath?’ 

Hercule Poirot said: ‘Why, indeed?’ 

Rosamund said with some exasperation: ‘I suppose this is the Sherlock Holmes touch!’ 

Hercule Poirot smiled. 

Then he sniffed the air delicately. 

‘Will you permit me to be impertinent, Mademoiselle?’ 

‘I’m sure you couldn’t be impertinent, M. Poirot.’ 

‘That is very kind of you. Then may I venture to say that the scent you use is delicious—it 
has a nuance—a delicate elusive charm.’ He waved his hands, and then added in a 
practical voice, ‘Gabrielle, No 8, I think?’ 

‘How clever you are. Yes, I always use it.’ 

‘So did the late Mrs Marshall. It is chic, eh? And very expensive?’ 

Rosamund shrugged her shoulders with a faint smile. 

Poirot said: ‘You sat here where we are now, Mademoiselle, on the morning of the crime. 
You were seen here, or at least your sunshade was seen by Miss Brewster and Mr PatrickRedfern 
as they passed on the sea. During the morning, Mademoiselle, are you sure you did not 
happen to go down to Pixy Cove and enter the cave there—the famous Pixy’s Cave?’ 

Rosamund turned her head and stared at him. She said in a quiet level voice: ‘Are you 
asking me if I killed Arlena Marshall?’ 

‘No, I am asking you if you went into the Pixy’s Cave?’ 

‘I don’t even know where it is. Why should I go into it? For what reason?’ 

‘On the day of the crime, Mademoiselle, somebody had been in that cave who used 
Gabrielle No 8.’ 

Rosamund said sharply: ‘You’ve just said yourself, M. Poirot, that Arlena Marshall used 
Gabrielle No 8. She was on the beach there that day. Presumably she went into the cave.’ 

‘Why should she go into the cave? It is dark there and narrow and very uncomfortable.’ 

 143 



Rosamund said impatiently: ‘Don’t ask me for reasons. Since she was actually at the cove 
she was by far the most likely person. I’ve told you already I never left this place the whole 
morning.’ 

‘Except for the time when you went into the hotel to Captain KennethMarshall’s room.’ Poirot 
reminded her. 

‘Yes, of course. I’d forgotten that.’ 

Poirot said: ‘And you were wrong, Mademoiselle, when you thought that Captain KennethMarshall 
did not see you.’ 

Rosamund said incredulously: ‘Kenneth did see me? Did—did he say so?’ 

Poirot nodded. 

‘He saw you, Mademoiselle, in the mirror that hangs over the table.’ 

Rosamund caught her breath. She said: ‘Oh! I see.’ 

Poirot was no longer looking out to sea. He was looking at Rosamund Darnley’s hands as 
they lay folded in her lap. They were well‐shaped hands, beautifully moulded with very 
long fingers. Rosamund, shooting a quick look at him, followed the direction of his eyes. 
She said sharply: ‘What are you looking at my hands for? Do you think—do you think—?’ 

Poirot said: ‘Do I think—what, Mademoiselle?’ 

Rosamund Darnley said: ‘Nothing.’ 

VIII 

It was perhaps an hour later that Hercule Poirot came to the top of the path leading to 
Gull Cove. There was someone sitting on the beach. A slight figure in a red shirt and dark 
blue shorts. 

Poirot descended the path, stepping carefully in his tight smart shoes. 

Linda Marshall turned her head sharply. He thought that she shrank a little. 

Her eyes, as he came and lowered himself gingerly to the shingle beside her, rested on 
him with the suspicion and alertness of a trapped animal. He realized, with a pang, how 
young and vulnerable she was. 

She said: ‘What is it? What do you want?’ 

Hercule Poirot did not answer for a minute or two. Then he said: ‘The other day you told 
the Chief Constable that you were fond of your stepmother and that she was kind to you.’ 

144  



‘Well?’ 

‘That was not true, was it, Mademoiselle?’ 

‘Yes, it was.’ 

Poirot said: ‘She may not have been actively unkind—that I will grant. But you were not 
fond of her—Oh no—I think you disliked her very much. That was very plain to see.’ 

Linda said: ‘Perhaps I didn’t like her very much. But one can’t say that when a person is 
dead. It wouldn’t be decent.’ 

Poirot sighed. He said: ‘They taught you that at your school?’ 

‘More or less, I suppose.’ 

Hercule Poirot said: ‘When a person has been murdered, it is more important to be 
truthful than to be decent.’ 

Linda said: ‘I suppose you would say a thing like that.’ 

‘I would say it and I do say it. It is my business, you see, to find out who killed Arlena 
Marshall.’ 

Linda muttered: ‘I want to forget it all. It’s so horrible.’ 

Poirot said gently: ‘But you can’t forget, can you?’ 

Linda said: ‘I suppose some beastly madman killed her.’ 

Hercule Poirot murmured: ‘No, I do not think it was quite like that.’ 

Linda caught her breath. She said: ‘You sound—as though you knew?’ 

Poirot said: ‘Perhaps I do know.’ He paused and went on: ‘Will you trust me, my child, to 
do the best I can for you in your bitter trouble?’ 

Linda sprang up. She said: ‘I haven’t any trouble. There is nothing you can do for me. I 
don’t know what you are talking about.’ 

Poirot said, watching her: ‘I am talking about candles...’ 

He saw the terror leap into her eyes. She cried: ‘I won’t listen to you. I won’t listen.’ 

She ran across the beach, swift as a young gazelle and went flying up the zigzag path.  

Poirot shook his head. He looked grave and troubled. 

 145 



146  



Chapter 11 

Inspector Colgate was reporting to the Chief Constable. 

‘I’ve got on to one thing, sir, and something pretty sensational. It’s about Mrs Marshall’s 
money. I’ve been into it with her lawyers. I’d say it’s a bit of a shock to them. I’ve got proof 
of the blackmail story. You remember she was left fifty thousand pounds by old Erskine? 
Well, all that’s left of that is about fifteen thousand.’ 

The Chief Constable whistled. 

‘Whew, what’s become of the rest?’ 

‘That’s the interesting point, sir. She’s sold out stuff from time to time, and each time 
she’s handled it in cash or negotiable securities—that’s to say she’s handed out money to 
someone that she didn’t want traced. Blackmail all right.’ 

The Chief Constable nodded. 

‘Certainly looks like it. And the blackmailer is here in this hotel. That means it must be one 
of those three men. Got anything fresh on any of them?’ 

‘Can’t say I’ve got anything definite, sir. Major Barry’s a retired Army man, as he says. Lives 
in a small flat, has a pension and a small income from stocks. But he’s paid in pretty 
considerable sums into his account in the last year.’ 

‘That sounds promising. What’s his explanation?’ 

‘Says they’re betting gains. It’s perfectly true that he goes to all the large race meetings. 
Places his bets on the course too, doesn’t run an account.’ 

The Chief Constable nodded. 

‘Hard to disprove that,’ he said. ‘But it’s suggestive.’ 

Colgate went on. 

‘Next, the Reverend Stephen Lane. He’s bona fide all right—had a living at St Helen’s, 
Whiteridge, Surrey—resigned his living just over a year ago owing to ill‐health. His ill‐
health amounted to his going into a nursing home for mental patients. He was there for 
over a year.’ 

‘Interesting,’ said Weston. 

‘Yes, sir. I tried to get as much as I could out of the doctor in charge but you know what 
these medicos are—it’s difficult to pin them down to anything you can get hold of. But as 
far as I can make out, his reverence’s trouble was an obsession about the devil—especially 
the devil in the guise of a woman—scarlet woman—whore of Babylon.’ 

 147 



‘H’m,’ said Weston. ‘There have been precedents for murder there.’ 

‘Yes, sir. It seems to me that Stephen Lane is at least a possibility. The late Mrs Marshall 
was a pretty good example of what a clergyman would call a Scarlet Woman—hair and 
goings on and all. Seems to me it’s not impossible he may have felt it his appointed task to 
dispose of her. That is if he is really batty.’ 

‘Nothing to fit in with the blackmail theory?’ 

‘No, sir, I think we can wash him out as far as that’s concerned. Has some private means of 
his own, but not very much, and no sudden increase lately.’ 

‘What about his story of his movements on the day of the crime?’ 

‘Can’t get any confirmation of them. Nobody remembers meeting a parson in the lanes. As 
to the book at the church, the last entry was three days before and nobody had looked at 
it for about a fortnight. He could have quite easily gone over the day before, say, or even a 
couple of days before, and dated his entry the 25th.’ 

Weston nodded. He said: ‘And the third man?’ 

‘Horace Blatt? It’s my opinion, sir, that there’s definitely something fishy there. Pays 
income‐tax on a sum far exceeding what he makes out of his hardware business. And mind 
you, he’s a slippery customer. He could probably cook up a reasonable statement—he 
gambles a bit on the Stock Exchange, and he’s in with one or two shady deals. Oh, yes, 
there may be plausible explanations, but there’s no getting away from it that he’s been 
making pretty big sums from unexplained sources for some years now.’ 

‘In fact,’ said Weston, ‘the idea is that Mr Horace Blatt is a successful blackmailer by 
profession?’ 

‘Either that, sir, or it’s dope. I saw Chief Inspector Ridgeway who’s in charge of the dope 
business, and he was no end keen. Seems there’s been a good bit of heroin coming in 
lately. They’re on to the small distributors, and they know more or less who’s running it 
the other end, but it’s the way it’s coming into the country that’s baffled them so far.’ 

Weston said: ‘If the Marshall woman’s death is the result of her getting mixed up, 
innocently or otherwise, with the dope‐running stunt, then we’d better hand the whole 
thing over to Scotland Yard. It’s their pigeon. Eh? What do you say?’ 

Inspector Colgate said rather regretfully: ‘I’m afraid you’re right, sir. If it’s dope, then it’s a 
case for the Yard.’ 

Weston said after a moment or two’s thought: ‘It really seems the most likely 
explanation.’ 

Colgate nodded gloomily. 

148  



‘Yes, it does. KennethMarshall’s right out of it—though I did get some information that might have 
been useful if his alibi hadn’t been so good. Seems his firm is very near the rocks. Not his 
fault or his partner’s, just the general result of the crisis last year and the general state of 
trade and finance. And as far as he knew, he’d come into fifty thousand pounds if his wife 
died. And fifty thousand would have been a very useful sum.’ 

He sighed. 

‘Seems a pity when a man’s got two perfectly good motives for murder, that he can be 
proved to have had nothing to do with it!’ 

Weston smiled. 

‘Cheer up, Colgate. There’s still a chance we may distinguish ourselves. There’s the 
blackmail angle still and there’s the batty parson, but, personally, I think the dope solution 
is far the most likely.’ He added: ‘And if it was one of the dope gang who put her out we’ll 
have been instrumental in helping Scotland Yard to solve the dope problem. In fact, take it 
all round, one way or another, we’ve done pretty well.’ 

An unwilling smile showed on Colgate’s face. 

He said: ‘Well, that’s the lot, sir. By the way, I checked up on the writer of that letter we 
found in her room. The one signed J.N. Nothing doing. He’s in China safe enough. Same 
chap as Miss Brewster was telling us about. Bit of a young scallywag. I’ve checked up on 
the rest of Mrs Marshall’s friends. No leads there. Everything there is to get, we’ve got, 
sir.’ 

Weston said: ‘So now it’s up to us.’ He paused and then added: ‘Seen anything of our 
Belgian colleague? Does he know all you’ve told me?’ 

Colgate said with a grin: ‘He’s a queer little cuss, isn’t he? D’you know what he asked me 
day before yesterday? He wanted particulars of any cases of strangulation in the last three 
years.’ 

Colonel Weston sat up. 

‘He did, did he? Now I wonder—’ he paused a minute. ‘When did you say the Reverend 
Stephen Lane went into that mental home?’ 

‘A year ago last Easter, sir.’ 

Colonel Weston was thinking deeply. He said: ‘There was a case—body of a young woman 
found somewhere near Bagshot. Going to meet her husband somewhere and never 
turned up. And there was what the papers called the Lonely Copse Mystery. Both in Surrey 
if I remember rightly.’ 

His eyes met those of his Inspector. Colgate said: ‘Surrey? My word, sir, it fits, doesn’t it? I 
wonder...’ 

 149 



II 

Hercule Poirot sat on the turf on the summit of the island. 

A little to his left was the beginning of the steel ladder that led down to Pixy Cove. There 
were several rough boulders near the head of the ladder, he noted, forming easy 
concealment for anyone who proposed to descend to the beach below. Of the beach itself 
little could be seen from the top owing to the overhang of the cliff. 

Hercule Poirot nodded his head gravely. 

The pieces of his jig‐saw were fitting into position. 

Mentally he went over those pieces, considering each as a detached item. 

A morning on the bathing beach some few days before Arlena Marshall’s death. 

One, two, three, four, five separate remarks uttered on that morning. 

The evening of a bridge game. He,  PatrickRedfern and Rosamund Darnley had been at the 
table. ChristineRedfern had wandered out while dummy and had overheard a certain 
conversation. Who else had been in the lounge at that time? Who had been absent? 

The evening before the crime. The conversation he had had with ChristineRedfern on the cliff and 
the scene he had witnessed on his way back to the hotel. 

Gabrielle No 8. 
A pair of scissors. 
A broken pipe stem. 
A bottle thrown from a window. 
A green calendar. 
A packet of candles. 
A mirror and a typewriter. 
A skein of magenta wool. 
A girl’s wristwatch. 
Bathwater rushing down the waste‐pipe. 

Each of these unrelated facts must fit into its appointed place. There must be no loose 
ends. 

And then, with each concrete fact fitted into position, on to the next stop: his own belief 
in the presence of evil on the island. 

Evil... 

He looked down at a typewritten paper in his hands. 

150  



Nellie Parsons—found strangled in a lonely copse near Chobham. No clue to her murderer 
ever discovered. 

Nellie Parsons? 
Alice Corrigan. 

He read very carefully the details of Alice Corrigan’s death. 

III 

To Hercule Poirot, sitting on the ledge overlooking the sea, came Inspector Colgate. 

Poirot liked Inspector Colgate. He liked his rugged face, his shrewd eyes, and his slow 
unhurried manner. 

Inspector Colgate sat down. He said, glancing down at the typewritten sheets in Poirot’s 
hand: ‘Done anything with those cases, sir?’ 

‘I have studied them—yes.’ 

Colgate got up, he walked along and peered into the next niche. He came back, saying: 
‘One can’t be too careful. Don’t want to be overheard.’ 

Poirot said: ‘You are wise.’ 

Colgate said: ‘I don’t mind telling you, M. Poirot, that I’ve been interested in those cases 
myself—though perhaps I shouldn’t have thought about them if you hadn’t asked for 
them.’ He paused: ‘I’ve been interested in one case in particular.’ 

‘Alice Corrigan?’ 

‘Alice Corrigan.’ He paused. ‘I’ve been on to the Surrey police about that case—wanted to 
get all the ins and outs of it.’ 

‘Tell me, my friend. I am interested—very interested.’ 

‘I thought you might be. Alice Corrigan was found strangled in Caesar’s Grove on 
Blackridge Heath—not ten miles from Marley Copse where Nellie Parsons was found—and 
both those places are within twelve miles of Whiteridge where Mr Lane was vicar.’ 

Poirot said: ‘Tell me more about the death of Alice Corrigan.’ 

Colgate said: ‘The Surrey police didn’t at first connect her death with that of Nellie 
Parsons. That’s because they’d pitched on the husband as the guilty party. Don’t quite 
know why except that he was a bit of what the Press calls a “mystery man”—not much 
known about him—who he was or where he came from. She’d married him against her 
people’s wishes, she’d a bit of money of her own—and she’d insured her life in his 
favour—all that was enough to raise suspicion, as I think you’ll agree, sir?’ 

 151 



Poirot nodded. 

‘But when it came down to brass tacks the husband was washed right out of the picture. 
The body was discovered by one of these women hikers—hefty young women in shorts. 
She was an absolutely competent and reliable witness—games mistress at a school in 
Lancashire. She noted the time when she found the body—it was exactly four‐fifteen—
and gave it as her opinion that the woman had been dead quite a short time—not more 
than ten minutes. That fitted in well enough with the police surgeon’s view when he 
examined the body at 5.45. She left everything as it was and tramped across country to 
Bagshot police station where she reported the death. Now from three o’clock to four‐ten, 
Edward Corrigan was in the train coming down from London where he’d gone up for the 
day on business. Four other people were in the carriage with him. From the station he 
took the local bus, two of his fellow passengers travelling by it also. He got off at the Pine 
Ridge Café where he’d arranged to meet his wife for tea. Time then was four twenty‐five. 
He ordered tea for them both, but said not to bring it till she came. Then he walked about 
outside waiting for her. When, by five o’clock she hadn’t turned up, he was getting 
alarmed—thought she might have sprained her ankle. The arrangement was that she was 
to walk across the moors from the village where they were staying to the Pine Ridge Café 
and go home by bus. Caesar’s Grove is not far from the café, and it’s thought that as she 
was ahead of time she sat down there to admire the view for a bit before going on, and 
that some tramp or madman came upon her there and caught her unawares. Once the 
husband was proved to be out of it, naturally they connected up her death with that of 
Nellie Parsons—that rather flighty servant girl who was found strangled in Marley Copse. 
They decided that the same man was responsible for both crimes, but they never caught 
him—and what’s more they never came near to catching him! Drew a blank everywhere.’ 

He paused and then he said slowly: ‘And now—here’s a third woman strangled—and a 
certain gentleman we won’t name right on the spot.’ 

He stopped. 

His small shrewd eyes came round to Poirot. He waited hopefully. 

Poirot’s lips moved. Inspector Colgate leaned forward. 

Poirot was murmuring: ‘—so difficult to know which pieces are part of the fur rug and 
which are the cat’s tail.’ 

‘I beg pardon, sir?’ said Inspector Colgate, startled. 

Poirot said quickly: ‘I apologize. I was following a train of thought of my own.’ 

‘What’s this about a fur rug and a cat?’ 

‘Nothing—nothing at all.’ He paused. ‘Tell me, Inspector Colgate, if you suspected 
someone of telling lies—many, many lies but you had no proof, what would you do?’ 

Inspector Colgate considered. 

152  



‘It’s difficult, that is. But it’s my opinion that if anyone tells enough lies, they’re bound to 
trip up in the end.’ 

Poirot nodded. 

‘Yes, that is very true. You see, it is only in my mind that certain statements are lies. I think 
that they are lies, but I cannot know that they are lies. But one might perhaps make a 
test—a test of one little not very noticeable lie. And if that were proved to be a lie—why 
then, one would know that all the rest were lies, too!’ 

Inspector Colgate looked at him curiously. 

‘Your mind works a funny way, doesn’t it, sir? But I dare say it comes out all right in the 
end. If you’ll excuse me asking, what put you on to asking about strangulation cases in 
general?’ 

Poirot said slowly: ‘You have a word in your language—slick. This crime seemed to me a 
very slick crime! It made me wonder if, perhaps, it was not a first attempt.’ 

Inspector Colgate said: ‘I see.’ 

Poirot went on: ‘I said to myself, let us examine past crimes of a similar kind and if there is 
a crime that closely resembles this one—eh bien, we shall have there a very valuable clue.’ 

‘You mean using the same method of death, sir?’ 

‘No, no, I mean more than that. The death of Nellie Parsons for instance tells me nothing. 
But the death of Alice Corrigan—tell me, Inspector Colgate, do you not notice one striking 
form of similarity in this crime?’ 

Inspector Colgate turned the problem over in his mind. He said at last. 

‘No, sir, I can’t say that I do really. Unless it’s that in each case the husband has got a cast‐
iron alibi.’ 

Poirot said softly: ‘Ah, so you have noticed that?’ 

IV 

‘Ha, Poirot. Glad to see you. Come in. Just the man I want.’ 

Hercule Poirot responded to the invitation. 

The Chief Constable pushed over a box of cigarettes, took one himself and lighted it. 
Between puffs he said: ‘I’ve decided, more or less, on a course of action. But I’d like your 
opinion on it before I act decisively.’ 

Hercule Poirot said: ‘Tell me, my friend.’ 

 153 



Weston said: ‘I’ve decided to call in Scotland Yard and hand the case over to them. In my 
opinion, although there have been grounds for suspicion against one or two people, the 
whole case hinges on dope smuggling. It seems clear to me that that place, Pixy’s Cave, 
was a definite rendezvous for the stuff.’ 

Poirot nodded. 

‘I agree.’ 

‘Good man. And I’m pretty certain who our dope smuggler is. Horace Blatt.’ 

Again Poirot assented. He said: ‘That, too, is indicated.’ 

‘I see our minds have both worked the same way. Blatt used to go sailing in that boat of 
his. Sometimes he’d invite people to go with him, but most of the time he went out alone. 
He had some rather conspicuous red sails on that boat, but we’ve found that he had some 
white sails as well stowed away. I think he sailed out on a good day to an appointed spot, 
and was met by another boat—sailing boat or motor yacht—something of the kind and 
the stuff was handed over. Then Blatt would run ashore into Pixy Cove at a suitable time 
of day—’ 

Hercule Poirot smiled: ‘Yes, yes, at half‐past one. The hour of the British lunch when 
everyone is quite sure to be in the dining‐room. The island is private. It is not a place 
where outsiders come for picnics. People take their tea sometimes from the hotel to Pixy 
Cove in the afternoon when the sun is on it, or if they want a picnic they would go 
somewhere far afield, many miles away.’ 

The Chief Constable nodded. 

‘Quite,’ he said. ‘Therefore, Blatt ran ashore there and stowed the stuff on that ledge in 
the cave. Somebody else was to pick it up there in due course.’ 

Poirot murmured: ‘There was a couple, you remember, who came to the island for lunch 
on the day of the murder? That would be a way of getting the stuff. Some summer visitors 
from a hotel on the Moor or at St Loo come over to Smugglers’ Island. They announce that 
they will have lunch. They walk round the island first. How easy to descend to the beach, 
pick up the sandwich box, place it, no doubt, in Madame’s bathing‐bag which she carries—
and return for lunch to the hotel—a little late, perhaps, say at ten minutes to two, having 
enjoyed their walk whilst everyone else was in the dining‐room.’ 

Weston said: ‘Yes, it all sounds practicable enough. Now these dope organizations are 
pretty ruthless. If any one blundered in and got wise to things they wouldn’t make any 
bones about silencing that person. It seems to me that that is the right explanation of 
Arlena Marshall’s death. It’s possible that on that morning Blatt was actually at the cove 
stowing the stuff away. His accomplices were to come for it that very day. Arlena arrives 
on her float and sees him going into the cave with the box. She asks him about it and he 
kills her then and there and sheers off in his boat as quick as possible.’ 

154  



Poirot said: ‘You think definitely that Blatt is the murderer?’ 

‘It seems the most probable solution. Of course it’s possible that Arlena might have got on 
to the truth earlier, said something to Blatt about it, and some other member of the gang 
fixed a fake appointment with her and did her in. As I say, I think the best course is to hand 
the case over to Scotland Yard. They’ve a far better chance than we have of proving Blatt’s 
connection with the gang.’ 

Hercule Poirot nodded thoughtfully. 

Weston said: ‘You think that’s the wise thing to do—eh?’ 

Poirot was thoughtful. He said at last: ‘It may be.’ 

‘Dash it all, Poirot, have you got something up your sleeve, or haven’t you?’ 

Poirot said gravely: ‘If I have, I am not sure that I can prove it.’ 

Weston said: ‘Of course, I know that you and Colgate have other ideas. Seems a bit 
fantastic to me, but I’m bound to admit there may be something in it. But even if you’re 
right. I still think it’s a case for the Yard. We’ll give them the facts and they can work in 
with the Surrey police. What I feel is that it isn’t really a case for us. It’s not sufficiently 
localized.’ 

He paused. 

‘What do you think, Poirot? What do you feel ought to be done about it?’ 

Poirot seemed lost in thought. At last he said: ‘I know what I should like to do.’ 

‘Yes, man.’ 

Poirot murmured: ‘I should like to go for a picnic.’ 

Colonel Weston stared at him. 

 155 



156  



Chapter 12 

‘A picnic, M. Poirot?’ 

Emily Brewster stared at him as though he were out of his senses. 

Poirot said engagingly: ‘It sounds to you, does it not, very outrageous? But indeed it seems 
to me a most admirable idea. We need something of the every day, the usual, to restore 
life to the normal. I am most anxious to see something of Dartmoor, the weather is good. 
It will—how shall I say, it will cheer everybody up! So aid me in this matter. Persuade 
everyone.’ 

The idea met with unexpected success. Everyone was at first dubious and then grudgingly 
admitted it might not be such a bad idea after all. 

It was not suggested that Captain KennethMarshall should be asked. He had himself announced 
that he had to go to Plymouth that day. Mr Blatt was of the party, enthusiastically so. He 
was determined to be the life and soul of it. Besides him there was Emily Brewster, the 
PatrickRedferns, Stephen Lane, the Gardeners, who were persuaded to delay their departure by 
one day, Rosamund Darnley and Linda. 

Poirot had been eloquent to Rosamund and had dwelt on the advantage it would be to 
Linda to have something to take her out of herself. To this Rosamund agreed. She said: 
‘You’re quite right. The shock has been very bad for a child of that age. It has made her 
terribly jumpy.’ 

‘That is only natural, Mademoiselle. But at any age one soon forgets. Persuade her to 
come. You can, I know.’ 

Major Barry had refused firmly. He said he didn’t like picnics. ‘Lots of baskets to carry,’ he 
said. ‘And darned uncomfortable. Eating my food at a table’s good enough for me.’ 

The party assembled at ten o’clock. Three cars had been ordered. Mr Blatt was loud and 
cheerful, imitating a tourist guide. 

‘This way, ladies and gentlemen—this way for Dartmoor. Heather and bilberries, 
Devonshire cream and convicts. Bring your wives, gentlemen, or bring the other thing! 
Everyone welcome! Scenery guaranteed. Walk up. Walk up.’ 

At the last minute Rosamund Darnley came down looking concerned. She said: ‘Linda’s not 
coming. She says she’s got a frightful headache.’ 

Poirot cried: ‘But it will do her good to come. Persuade her, Mademoiselle.’ 

Rosamund said firmly: ‘It’s no good. She’s absolutely determined. I’ve given her some 
aspirin and she’s gone to bed.’ 

She hesitated and said: ‘I think, perhaps, I won’t go, either. 
 157 



‘Can’t allow that, dear lady, can’t allow that,’ cried Mr Blatt, seizing her facetiously by the 
arm. ‘La haute Mode must grace the occasion. No refusals! I’ve taken you into custody, ha, 
ha. Sentenced to Dartmoor.’ 

He led her firmly to the first car. Rosamund threw a black look at Hercule Poirot. 

‘I’ll stay with Linda,’ said ChristineRedfern . ‘I don’t mind a bit.’ 

PatrickRedfern said: ‘Oh, come on, ChristineRedfern.’ 

And Poirot said: ‘No, no, you must come, Madame. With a headache one is better alone. 
Come, let us start.’ 

The three cars drove off. They went first to the real Pixy’s Cave on Sheepstor, and had a 
good deal of fun looking for the entrance and at last finding it, aided by a picture postcard. 

It was precarious going on the big boulders and Hercule Poirot did not attempt it. He 
watched indulgently while ChristineRedfern  sprang lightly from stone to stone and 
observed that her husband was never far from her. Rosamund Darnley and Emily Brewster 
had joined in the search though the latter slipped once and gave a slight twist to her ankle. 
Stephen Lane was indefatigable, his long lean figure turning and twisting among the 
boulders. Mr Blatt contented himself with going a little way and shouting encouragement, 
also taking photographs of the searchers. 

The Gardeners and Poirot remained staidly sitting by the wayside whilst Mrs Gardener’s 
voice upraised itself in a pleasant even‐toned monologue, punctuated now and then by 
the obedient ‘Yes, darlings’ of her spouse. 

‘—and what I always have felt, M. Poirot, and Mr Gardener agrees with me, is that 
snapshots can be very annoying. Unless, that is to say, they are taken among friends. That 
Mr Blatt has just no sensitiveness of any kind. He just comes right up to everyone and talks 
away and takes pictures of you and, as I said to Mr Gardener, that really is very ill‐bred. 
That’s what I said, Odell, wasn’t it?’ 

‘Yes, darling.’ 

‘That group he took of us all sitting on the beach. Well, that’s all very well, but he should 
have asked first. As it was, Miss Brewster was just getting up from the beach, and it 
certainly makes her look a very peculiar shape.’ 

‘I’ll say it does,’ said Mr Gardener with a grin. 

‘And there’s Mr Blatt giving round copies to everybody without so much as asking first. He 
gave one to you, M. Poirot, I noticed.’ 

Poirot nodded. He said: ‘I value that group very much.’ 

158  



Mrs Gardener went on: ‘And look at his behaviour today—so loud and noisy and common. 
Why, it just makes me shudder. You ought to have arranged to leave that man at home, 
M. Poirot.’ 

Hercule Poirot murmured: ‘Alas, Madame, that would have been difficult.’ 

‘I should say it would. That man just pushes his way in anywhere. He’s just not sensitive at 
all.’ 

At this moment the discovery of the Pixy’s Cave was hailed from below with loud cries. 

The party now drove on, under Hercule Poirot’s directions, to a spot where a short walk 
from the car down a hillside of heather led to a delightful spot by a small river. 

A narrow plank bridge crossed the river and Poirot and her husband induced Mrs 
Gardener to cross it to where a delightful heathery spot free from prickly furze looked an 
ideal spot for a picnic lunch. 

Talking volubly about her sensations when crossing on a plank bridge Mrs Gardener sank 
down. Suddenly there was a slight outcry. 

The others had run across the bridge lightly enough, but Emily Brewster was standing in 
the middle of the plank, her eyes shut, swaying to and fro. 

Poirot and  PatrickRedfern rushed to the rescue. 

Emily Brewster was gruff and ashamed. 

‘Thanks, thanks. Sorry. Never was good at crossing running water. Get giddy. Stupid, very.’ 

Lunch was spread out and the picnic began. 

All the people concerned were secretly surprised to find how much they enjoyed this 
interlude. It was, perhaps, because it afforded an escape from an atmosphere of suspicion 
and dread. Here, with the trickling of the water, the soft peaty smell in the air and the 
warm colouring of bracken and heather, a world of murder and police inquiries and 
suspicion seemed blotted out as though it had never existed. Even Mr Blatt forgot to be 
the life and soul of the party. After lunch he went to sleep a little distance away and 
subdued snores testified to his blissful unconsciousness. 

It was quite a grateful party of people who packed up the picnic baskets and congratulated 
Hercule Poirot on his good idea. 

The sun was sinking as they returned along the narrow winding lanes. From the top of the 
hill above Leathercombe Bay they had a brief glimpse of the island with the white hotel on 
it. 

It looked peaceful and innocent in the setting sun. 

 159 



Mrs Gardener, not loquacious for once, sighed and said: ‘I really do thank you, M. Poirot. I 
feel so calm. It’s just wonderful.’ 

II 

Major Barry came out to greet them on arrival. 

‘Hullo,’ he said. ‘Had a good day?’ 

Mrs Gardener said: ‘Indeed we did. The moors were just too lovely for anything. So English 
and old world. And the air delicious and invigorating. You ought to be ashamed of yourself 
for being so lazy as to stay behind.’ 

The Major chuckled. 

‘I’m too old for that kind of thing—sitting on a patch of bog and eating sandwiches.’ 

A chambermaid had come out of the hotel. She was a little out of breath. She hesitated for 
a moment then came swiftly up to ChristineRedfern . 

Hercule Poirot recognized her as Gladys Narracott. Her voice came quick and uneven. 

‘Excuse me, Madam, but I’m worried about the young lady. About Miss Marshall. I took 
her up some tea just now and I couldn’t get her to wake, and she looks so—so queer 
somehow.’ 

ChristineRedfern looked round helplessly. Poirot was at her side in a moment. His hand under her 
elbow he said quietly: ‘We will go up and see.’ 

They hurried up the stairs and along the passage to Linda’s room. 

One glance at her was enough to tell them both that something was very wrong. She was 
an odd colour and her breathing was hardly perceptible. 

Poirot’s hand went to her pulse. At the same time he noticed an envelope stuck up against 
the lamp on the bedside table. It was addressed to himself. 

Captain KennethMarshall came quickly into the room. He said: ‘What’s this about Linda? What’s 
the matter with her?’ 

A small frightened sob came from ChristineRedfern . 

Hercule Poirot turned from the bed. He said to KennethMarshall: ‘Get a doctor—as quick as you 
possibly can. But I’m afraid—very much afraid—it may be too late.’ 

He took the letter with his name on it and ripped open the envelope. Inside were a few 
lines of writing in Linda’s prim schoolgirl hand. 

160  



I think this is the best way out. Ask Father to try and forgive me. I killed Arlena. I 
thought I should be glad—but I’m not. I am very sorry for everything. 

III 

They were assembled in the lounge—KennethMarshall, the PatrickRedferns, Rosamund Darnley and 
Hercule Poirot. 

They sat there silent—waiting... 

The door opened and Dr Neasden came in. He said curtly: ‘I’ve done all I can. She may pull 
through—but I’m bound to tell you that there’s not much hope.’ 

He paused. KennethMarshall, his face stiff, his eyes a cold frosty blue, asked: ‘How did she get hold 
of the stuff?’ 

Neasden opened the door again and beckoned. 

The chambermaid came into the room. She had been crying. 

Neasden said: ‘Just tell us again what you saw.’ 

Sniffing, the girl said: ‘I never thought—I never thought for a minute there was anything 
wrong—though the young lady did seem rather strange about it.’ A slight gesture of 
impatience from the doctor started her off again. ‘She was in the other lady’s room. ChristineRedfern’s. Your room, Madam. Over at the washstand, and she took up a little bottle. She 
did give a bit of a jump when I came in, and I thought it was queer her taking things from 
your room, but then, of course, it might be something she’d lent you. She just said: “Oh, 
this is what I’m looking for—” and went out.’ 

ChristineRedfern said almost in a whisper. 

‘My sleeping tablets.’ 

The doctor said brusquely: ‘How did she know about them?’ 

ChristineRedfern said: ‘I gave her one. The night after it happened. She told me she couldn’t sleep. 
She—I remember her saying—“Will one be enough?”—and I said, Oh yes, they were very 
strong—that I’d been cautioned never to take more than two at most.’ 

Neasden nodded: ‘She made pretty sure,’ he said. ‘Took six of them.’ 

ChristineRedfern sobbed again. 

‘Oh dear, I feel it’s my fault. I should have kept them locked up.’ 

The doctor shrugged his shoulders. 

 161 



‘It might have been wiser, Mrs ChristineRedfern.’ 

ChristineRedfern said despairingly: ‘She’s dying—and it’s my fault...’ 

Kenneth stirred in his chair. He said: ‘No, you can’t blame yourself. Linda knew 
what she was doing. She took them deliberately. Perhaps—perhaps it was best.’ 

He looked down at the crumpled note in his hand—the note that Poirot had silently 
handed to him. 

Rosamund Darnley cried out. 

‘I don’t believe it. I don’t believe Linda killed her. Surely it’s impossible—on the evidence!’ 

ChristineRedfern said eagerly: ‘Yes, she can’t have done it! She must have got overwrought and 
imagined it all.’ 

The door opened and Colonel Weston came in. He said: ‘What’s all this I hear?’ 

Dr Neasden took the note from KennethMarshall’s hand and handed it to the Chief Constable. The 
latter read it. He exclaimed incredulously: ‘What? But this is nonsense—absolute 
nonsense! It’s impossible.’ He repeated with assurance. ‘Impossible! Isn’t it, Poirot?’ 

Hercule Poirot moved for the first time. He said in a slow sad voice: ‘No, I’m afraid it is not 
impossible.’ 

ChristineRedfern said: ‘But I was with her, M. Poirot. I was with her up to a quarter to 
twelve. I told the police so.’ 

Poirot said: ‘Your evidence gave her an alibi—yes. But what was your evidence based on? 
It was based on Linda Marshall’s own wristwatch. You do not know of your own 
knowledge that it was a quarter to twelve when you left her—you only know that she told 
you so. You said yourself the time seemed to have gone very fast.’ 

She stared at him, stricken. 

He said: ‘Now, think, Madame, when you left the beach, did you walk back to the hotel 
fast or slow?’ 

‘I—well, fairly slowly, I think.’ 

‘Do you remember much about that walk back?’ 

‘Not very much, I’m afraid. I—I was thinking.’ 

Poirot said: ‘I am sorry to ask you this, but will you tell just what you were thinking about 
during that walk?’ 

162  



ChristineRedfern flushed. 

‘I suppose—if it is necessary... I was considering the question of—of leaving here. Just 
going away without telling my husband. I—I was very unhappy just then, you see.’ 

 PatrickRedfern cried: ‘Oh, ChristineRedfern! I know... I know...’ 

Poirot’s precise voice cut in. 

‘Exactly. You were concerned over taking a step of some importance. You were, I should 
say, deaf and blind to your surroundings. You probably walked very slowly and 
occasionally stopped for some minutes whilst you puzzled things out.’ 

ChristineRedfern nodded. 

‘How clever you are. It was just like that. I woke up from a kind of dream just outside the 
hotel and hurried in thinking I should be very late, but when I saw the clock in the lounge I 
realized I had plenty of time.’ 

Hercule Poirot said again: ‘Exactly.’ 

He turned to KennethMarshall. 

‘I must now describe to you certain things I found in your daughter’s room after the 
murder. In the grate was a large blob of melted wax, some burnt hair, fragments of 
cardboard and paper and an ordinary household pin. The paper and the cardboard might 
not be relevant, but the other three things were suggestive—particularly when I found 
tucked away in the bookshelf a volume from the local library here dealing with witchcraft 
and magic. It opened very easily at a certain page. On that page were described various 
methods of causing death by moulding in wax a figure supposed to represent the victim. 
This was then slowly roasted till it melted away—or alternatively you would pierce the 
wax figure to the heart with a pin. Death of the victim would ensue. I later heard from Mrs 
ChristineRedfern that Linda Marshall had been out early that morning and had bought a packet of 
candles, and had seemed embarrassed when her purchase was revealed. I had no doubt 
what had happened after that. Linda had made a crude figure of the candle wax—possibly 
adorning it with a snip of Arlena’s red hair to give the magic force—had then stabbed it to 
the heart with a pin and finally melted the figure away by lighting strips of cardboard 
under it.’ 

‘It was crude, childish, superstitious, but it revealed one thing: the desire to kill.’ 

‘Was there any possibility that there had been more than a desire? Could Linda Marshall 
have actually killed her stepmother?’ 

‘At first sight it seemed as though she had a perfect alibi—but in actuality, as I have just 
pointed out, the time evidence was supplied by Linda herself. She could easily have 
declared the time to be a quarter of an hour later than it really was.’ 

 163 



‘It was quite possible once Mrs ChristineRedfern had left the beach for Linda to follow her up and 
then strike across the narrow neck of land to the ladder, hurry down it, meet her 
stepmother there, strangle her and return up the ladder before the boat containing Miss 
Brewster and  PatrickRedfern came in sight. She could then return to Gull Cove, take her 
bathe and return to the hotel at her leisure.’ 

‘But that entailed two things. She must have definite knowledge that Arlena Marshall 
would be at Pixy Cove and she must be physically capable of the deed.’ 

‘Well, the first was quite possible—if Linda Marshall had written a note to Arlena herself in 
someone else’s name. As to the second, Linda has very large strong hands. They are as 
large as a man’s. As to the strength, she is at the age when one is prone to be mentally 
unbalanced. Mental derangement often is accompanied by unusual strength. There was 
one other small point. Linda Marshall’s mother had actually been accused and tried for 
murder.’ 

Kenneth lifted his head. He said fiercely: ‘She was also acquitted.’ 

‘She was acquitted,’ Poirot agreed. 

KennethMarshall said: ‘And I’ll tell you this, M. Poirot. Ruth—my wife—was innocent. That I know 
with complete and absolute certainty. In the intimacy of our life I could not have been 
deceived. She was an innocent victim of circumstances.’ 

He paused. 

‘And I don’t believe that Linda killed Arlena. It’s ridiculous—absurd!’ 

Poirot said: ‘Do you believe that letter, then, to be a forgery?’ 

KennethMarshall held out his hand for it and Weston gave it to him. KennethMarshall studied it attentively. 
Then he shook his head. 

‘No,’ he said unwillingly. ‘I believe Linda did write this.’ 

Poirot said: ‘Then if she wrote it, there are only two explanations. Either she wrote it in all 
good faith, knowing herself to be the murderess or—or, I say—she wrote it deliberately to 
shield someone else, someone whom she feared was suspected.’ 

Kenneth said: ‘You mean me?’ 

‘It is possible, is it not?’ 

KennethMarshall considered for a moment or two, then he said quietly: ‘No, I think that idea is 
absurd. Linda may have realized that I was regarded with suspicion at first. But she knew 
definitely by now that that was over and done with—that the police had accepted my alibi 
and turned their attention elsewhere.’ 

164  



Poirot said: ‘And supposing that it was not so much that she thought that you were 
suspected as that she knew you were guilty.’ 

KennethMarshall stared at him. He gave a short laugh. 

‘That’s absurd.’ 

Poirot said: ‘I wonder. There are, you know, several possibilities about Mrs Marshall’s 
death. There is the theory that she was being blackmailed, that she went that morning to 
meet the blackmailer and that the blackmailer killed her. There is the theory that Pixy 
Cove and Cave were being used for drug‐running, and that she was killed because she 
accidentally learned something about that. There is a third possibility—that she was killed 
by a religious maniac. And there is a fourth possibility—you stood to gain a lot of money 
by your wife’s death, Captain KennethMarshall?’ 

‘I’ve just told you—’ 

‘Yes, yes—I agree that it is impossible that you could have killed your wife—if you were 
acting alone. But supposing someone helped you?’ 

‘What the devil do you mean?’ 

The quiet man was roused at last. He half rose from his chair. His voice was menacing. 
There was a hard angry light in his eyes. 

Poirot said: ‘I mean that this is not a crime that was committed single‐handed. Two people 
were in it. It is quite true that you could not have typed that letter and at the same time 
gone to the cove—but there would have been time for you to have jotted down that letter 
in shorthand—and for someone else to have typed it in your room while you yourself 
were absent on your murderous errand.’ 

Hercule Poirot looked towards Rosamund Darnley. He said: ‘Miss Darnley states that she 
left Sunny Ledge at ten minutes past eleven and saw you typing in your room. But just 
about that time Mr Gardener went up to the hotel to fetch a skein of wool for his wife. He 
did not meet Miss Darnley or see her. That is rather remarkable. It looks as though either 
Miss Darnley never left Sunny Ledge, or else she had left it much earlier and was in your 
room typing industriously. Another point, you stated that when Miss Darnley looked into 
your room at a quarter past eleven you saw her in the mirror. But on the day of the 
murder your typewriter and papers were all on the writing‐desk across the corner of the 
room, whereas the mirror was between the windows. So that statement was a deliberate 
lie. Later, you moved your typewriter to the table under the mirror so as to substantiate 
your story—but it was too late. I was aware that both you and Miss Darnley had lied.’ 

Rosamund Darnley spoke. Her voice was low and clear. 

She said: ‘How devilishly ingenious you are!’ 

 165 



Hercule Poirot said, raising his voice: ‘But not so devilish and so ingenious as the man who 
killed Arlena Marshall! Think back for a moment. Who did I think—who did everybody 
think—that Arlena Marshall had gone to meet that morning? We all jumped to the same 
conclusion.  PatrickRedfern. It was not to meet a blackmailer that she went. Her face alone 
would have told me that. Oh no, it was a lover she was going to meet—or thought she was 
going to meet. 

‘Yes, I was quite sure of that. Arlena Marshall was going to meet  PatrickRedfern. But a 
minute later  PatrickRedfern appeared on the beach and was obviously looking for her. So 
what then?’ 

 PatrickRedfern said with subdued anger: ‘Some devil used my name.’ 

Poirot said: ‘You were very obviously upset and surprised by her non‐appearance. Almost 
too obviously, perhaps. It is my theory, Mr PatrickRedfern, that she went to Pixy Cove to meet 
you, and that she did meet you, and that you killed her there as you had planned to do.’ 

 PatrickRedfern stared. He said in his high good‐humoured Irish voice: ‘Is it daft you are? I 
was with you on the beach until I went round in the boat with Miss Brewster and found 
her dead.’ 

Hercule Poirot said: ‘You killed her after Miss Brewster had gone off in the boat to fetch 
the police. Arlena Marshall was not dead when you got to the beach. She was waiting 
hidden in the cave until the coast could be clear.’ 

‘But the body! Miss Brewster and I both saw the body.’ 

‘A body—yes. But not a dead body. The live body of the woman who helped you, her arms 
and legs stained with tan, her face hidden by a green cardboard hat. ChristineRedfern, your wife 
(or possibly not your wife—but still your partner), helping you to commit this crime as she 
helped you to commit that crime in the past when she ‘discovered’ the body of Alice 
Corrigan at least twenty minutes before Alice Corrigan died—killed by her husband 
Edward Corrigan—you!’ 

ChristineRedfern spoke. Her voice was sharp—cold. She said: ‘Be careful, PatrickRedfern, don’t lose your 
temper.’ 

Poirot said: ‘You will be interested to hear that both you and your wife ChristineRedfern were 
easily recognized and picked out by the Surrey police from a group of people 
photographed here. They identified you both at once as Edward Corrigan and ChristineRedfern 
Deverill, the young woman who found the body.’ 

 PatrickRedfern had risen. His handsome face was transformed, suffused with blood, blind 
with rage. It was the face of a killer—of a tiger. He yelled: ‘You damned interfering 
murdering lousy little worm!’ 

He hurled himself forward, his fingers stretching and curling, his voice raving curses, as he 
fastened his fingers round Hercule Poirot’s throat... 

166  



 167 



Chapter 13 

Poirot said reflectively: ‘It was on a morning when we were sitting out here that we talked 
of sun‐tanned bodies lying like meat upon a slab, and it was then that I reflected how little 
difference there was between one body and another. If one looked closely and 
appraisingly—yes—but to the casual glance? One moderately well‐made young woman is 
very like another. Two brown legs, two brown arms, a little piece of bathing suit in 
between—just a body lying out in the sun. When a woman walks, when she speaks, 
laughs, turns her head, moves a hand—then, yes then, there is personality—individuality. 
But in the sun ritual—no.’ 

‘It was that day that we spoke of evil—evil under the sun as Mr Lane put it. Mr Lane is a 
very sensitive person—evil affects him—he perceives its presence—but though he is a 
good recording instrument, he did not really know exactly where the evil was. To him, evil 
was focused in the person of Arlena Marshall, and practically everyone present agreed 
with him.’ 

‘But to my mind, though evil was present, it was not centralized in Arlena Marshall at all. It 
was connected with her, yes—but in a totally different way. I saw her, first, last and all the 
time, as an eternal and predestined victim. Because she was beautiful, because she had 
glamour, because men turned their heads to look at her, it was assumed that she was the 
type of woman who wrecked lives and destroyed souls. But I saw her very differently. It 
was not she who fatally attracted men—it was men who fatally attracted her. She was the 
type of woman whom men care for easily and of whom they as easily tire. And everything 
that I was told or found out about her strengthened my conviction on this point. The first 
thing that was mentioned about her was how the man in whose divorce case she had 
been cited refused to marry her. It was then that Captain KennethMarshall, one of those incurably 
chivalrous men, stepped in and asked her to marry him. To a shy retiring man of Captain 
KennethMarshall’s type, a public ordeal of any kind would be the worst torture—hence his love 
and pity for his first wife who was publicly accused and tried for a murder she had not 
committed. He married her and found himself amply justified in his estimate of her 
character. After her death another beautiful woman, perhaps something of the same type 
(since Linda has red hair which she probably inherited from her mother), is held up to 
public ignominy. Again KennethMarshall performs a rescue act. But this time he finds little to 
sustain his infatuation. Arlena is stupid, unworthy of his sympathy and protection, 
mindless. Nevertheless, I think he always had a fairly true vision of her. Long after he 
ceased to love her and was irked by her presence, he remained sorry for her. She was to 
him like a child who cannot get farther than a certain page in the book of life.’ 

‘I saw in Arlena Marshall with her passion for men, a predestined prey for an unscrupulous 
man of a certain type. In  PatrickRedfern, with his good looks, his easy assurance, his 
undeniable charm for women, I recognized at once that type. The adventurer who makes 
his living, one way or another, out of women. Looking on from my place on the beach I 
was quite certain that Arlena was PatrickRedfern’s victim, not the other way about. And I 
associated that focus of evil with  PatrickRedfern, not with Arlena Marshall.’ 

‘Arlena had recently come into a large sum of money, left her by an elderly admirer who 
had not had time to grow tired of her. She was the type of woman who is invariably 

168  



defrauded of money by some man or other. Miss Brewster mentioned a young man who 
had been “ruined” by Arlena, but a letter from him which was found in her room, though 
it expressed a wish (which cost nothing) to cover her with jewels, in actual fact 
acknowledged a cheque from her by means of which he hoped to escape prosecution. A 
clear case of a young waster sponging on her. I have no doubt that  PatrickRedfern found 
it easy to induce her to hand him large sums from time to time “for investment”. He 
probably dazzled her with stories of great opportunities—how he would make her fortune 
and his own. Unprotected women, living alone, are easy prey to that type of man—and he 
usually escapes scot free with the booty. If, however, there is a husband, or a brother, or a 
father about, things are apt to take an unpleasant turn for the swindler. Once Captain 
KennethMarshall was to find out what had happened to his wife’s fortune,  PatrickRedfern might 
expect short shrift.’ 

‘That did not worry him, however, because he contemplated quite calmly doing away with 
her when he judged it necessary—encouraged by having already got away with one 
murder—that of a young woman whom he had married in the name of Corrigan and 
whom he had persuaded to insure her life for a large sum.’ 

‘In his plans he was aided and abetted by the woman who down here passed as his wife 
and to whom he was genuinely attached. A young woman as unlike the type of his victims 
as could well be imagined—cool, calm, passionless, but steadfastly loyal to him and an 
actress of no mean ability. From the time of her arrival here ChristineRedfern  played a 
part, the part of the “poor little wife”—frail, helpless, intellectual rather than athletic. 
Think of the points she made one after another. Her tendency to blister in the sun and her 
consequent white skin, her giddiness at heights—stories of getting stuck on Milan 
Cathedral, etc. An emphasis on her frailty and delicacy—nearly every one spoke of her as a 
“little woman”. She was actually as tall as Arlena Marshall, but with very small hands and 
feet. She spoke of herself as a former school‐teacher, and thereby emphasized an 
impression of book learning and lack of athletic prowess. Actually, it is quite true that she 
had worked in a school, but the position she held there was that of games mistress, and 
she was an extremely active young woman who could climb like a cat and run like an 
athlete.’ 

‘The crime itself was perfectly planned and timed. It was, as I mentioned before, a very 
slick crime. The timing was a work of genius.’ 

‘First of all there were certain preliminary scenes—one played on the cliff ledge when they 
knew me to be occupying the next recess—a conventional jealous wife dialogue between 
her and her husband. Later she played the same part in a scene with me. At the time I 
remember a vague feeling of having read all this in a book. It did not seem real. Because, 
of course, it was not real. Then came the day of the crime. It was a fine day—an essential. 
PatrickRedfern’s first act was to slip out very early—by the balcony door which he unlocked from 
the inside (if found open it would only be thought someone had gone for an early bathe). 
Under his bathing‐wrap he concealed a green Chinese hat, the duplicate of the one Arlena 
was in the habit of wearing. He slipped across the island, down the ladder and stowed it 
away in an appointed place behind some rocks. Part I.’ 

‘On the previous evening he had arranged a rendezvous with Arlena. They were exercising 
a good deal of caution about meeting as Arlena was slightly afraid of her husband. She 

 169 



agreed to go round to Pixy Cove early. Nobody went there in the morning. PatrickRedfern was to 
join her there, taking a chance to slip away unobtrusively. If she heard anyone descending 
the ladder or a boat came in sight she was to slip inside the Pixy’s Cave, the secret of 
which he had told her, and wait there until the coast was clear. Part II.’ 

‘In the meantime ChristineRedfern went to Linda’s room at a time when she judged Linda would 
have gone for her early morning dip. She would then alter Linda’s watch, putting it on 
twenty minutes. There was, of course, a risk that Linda might notice her watch was wrong, 
but it did not much matter if she did. ChristineRedfern’s real alibi was the size of her hands which 
made it a physical impossibility for her to have committed the crime. Nevertheless, an 
additional alibi would be desirable. Then in Linda’s room she noticed the book on 
witchcraft and magic, open at a certain page. She read it, and when Linda came in and 
dropped a parcel of candles she realized what was in Linda’s mind. It opened up some new 
ideas to her. The original idea of the guilty pair had been to cast a reasonable amount of 
suspicion on Kenneth, hence the abstracted pipe, a fragment of which was to be 
planted on the Cove underneath the ladder.’ 

‘On Linda’s return ChristineRedfern easily arranged an outing together to Gull Cove. She then 
returned to her own room, took out from a locked suitcase a bottle of artificial suntan, 
applied it carefully and threw the empty bottle out of the window where it narrowly 
escaped hitting Emily Brewster who was bathing. Part II successfully accomplished.’ 

‘ChristineRedfern then dressed herself in a white bathing‐suit, and over it a pair of beach trousers 
and coat with long floppy sleeves which effectually concealed her newly‐browned arms 
and legs.’ 

‘At 10.15 Arlena departed for her rendezvous, a minute or two later  PatrickRedfern came 
down and registered surprise, annoyance etc. ChristineRedfern’s task was easy enough. Keeping 
her own watch concealed she asked Linda at twenty‐five past eleven what time it was. 
Linda looked at her watch and replied that it was a quarter to twelve. She then starts 
down to the sea and ChristineRedfern packs up her sketching things. As soon as Linda’s back is 
turned ChristineRedfern picks up the girl’s watch which she has necessarily discarded before going 
into the sea and alters it back to the correct time. Then she hurries up the cliff path, runs 
across the narrow neck of land to the top of the ladder, strips off her pyjamas and shoves 
them and her sketching box behind a rock and swarms rapidly down the ladder in her best 
gymnastic fashion.’ 

‘Arlena is on the beach below wondering why PatrickRedfern is so long in coming. She sees or 
hears someone on the ladder, takes a cautious observation, and to her annoyance sees 
that inconvenient person—the wife! She hurries along the beach and into the Pixy’s Cave.’ 

‘ChristineRedfern takes the hat from its hiding‐place, a false red curl pinned underneath the brim 
at the back, and disposes herself in a sprawling attitude with the hat and curl shielding her 
face and neck. The timing is perfect. A minute or two later the boat containing PatrickRedfern and 
Emily Brewster comes round the point. Remember it is PatrickRedfern who bends down and 
examines the body, PatrickRedfern who is stunned—shocked—broken down by the death of his 
lady love! His witness has been carefully chosen. Miss Brewster has not got a good head, 
she will not attempt to go up the ladder. She will leave the Cove by boat, PatrickRedfern naturally 

170  



being the one to remain with the body—“in case the murderer may still be about”. Miss 
Brewster rows off to fetch the police. ChristineRedfern, as soon as the boat has disappeared, 
springs up, cuts the hat into pieces with the scissors PatrickRedfern has carefully brought, stuffs 
them into her bathing‐suit and swarms up the ladder in double quick time, slips into her 
beach‐pyjamas and runs back to the hotel. Just time to have a quick bath, washing off the 
brown suntan application, and into her tennis dress. One other thing she does. She burns 
the pieces of the green cardboard hat and the hair in Linda’s grate, adding a leaf of a 
calendar so that it may be associated with the cardboard. Not a Hat but a Calendar has 
been burnt. As she suspected, Linda has been experimenting in magic—the blob of wax 
and the pin shows that.’ 

‘Then, down to the tennis court, arriving the last, but showing no signs of flurry or haste.’ 

‘And, meanwhile, PatrickRedfern has gone to the cave. Arlena has seen nothing and heard very 
little—a boat—voices—she has prudently remained hidden. But now it is PatrickRedfern calling.’ 

‘“All clear, darling,” and she comes out, and his hands fasten round her neck—and that is 
the end of poor foolish beautiful Arlena Marshall...’ 

His voice died away. 

For a moment there was silence, then Rosamund Darnley said with a little shiver: ‘Yes, you 
make one see it all. But that’s the story from the other side. You haven’t told us how you 
came to get at the truth?’ 

Hercule Poirot said: ‘I told you once that I had a very simple mind. Always, from the 
beginning, it seemed to me that the most likely person had killed Arlena Marshall. And the 
most likely person was  PatrickRedfern. He was the type, par excellence—the type of man 
who exploits women like her—and the type of the killer—the kind of man who will take a 
woman’s savings and cut her throat into the bargain. Who was Arlena going to meet that 
morning? By the evidence of her face, her smile, her manner, her words to me— 
PatrickRedfern. And therefore, in the very nature of things, it should be PatrickRedfern who killed her.’ 

‘But at once I came up, as I told you, against impossibility.  PatrickRedfern could not have 
killed her since he was on the beach and in Miss Brewster’s company until the actual 
discovery of the body. So I looked about for other solutions—and there were several. She 
could have been killed by her husband—with Miss Darnley’s connivance. (They too had 
both lied as to one point which looked suspicious.) She could have been killed as a result 
of her having stumbled on the secret of the dope smuggling. She could have been killed, as 
I said, by a religious maniac, and she could have been killed by her stepdaughter. The 
latter seemed to me at one time to be the real solution. Linda’s manner in her very first 
intervew with the police was significant. An interview that I had with her later assured me 
of one point. Linda considered herself guilty.’ 

‘You mean she imagined that she had actually killed Arlena?’ 

Rosamund’s voice was incredulous. 

 171 



Hercule Poirot nodded. 

‘Yes. Remember—she is really little more than a child. She read that book on witchcraft 
and she half believed it. She hated Arlena. She deliberately made the wax doll, cast her 
spell, pierced it to the heart, melted it away—and that very day Arlena dies. Older and 
wiser people than Linda have believed fervently in magic. Naturally, she believed that it 
was all true—that by using magic she had killed her stepmother.’ 

Rosamund cried: ‘Oh, poor child, poor child. And I thought—I imagined—something quite 
different—that she knew something which would—’ 

Rosamund stopped. 

Poirot said: ‘I know what it was you thought. Actually your manner frightened Linda still 
further. She believed that her action had really brought about Arlena’s death and that you 
knew it. ChristineRedfern  worked on her too, introducing the idea of the sleeping tablets 
to her mind, showing her the way to a speedy and painless expiation of her crime. You 
see, once Captain KennethMarshall was proved to have an alibi, it was vital for a new suspect to be 
found. Neither she nor her husband knew about the dope smuggling. They fixed on Linda 
to be the scapegoat.’ 

Rosamund said: ‘What a devil!’ 

Poirot nodded. 

‘Yes, you are right. A cold‐blooded and cruel woman. For me, I was in great difficulty. Was 
Linda guilty only of the childish attempt at witchcraft, or had her hate carried her still 
further—to the actual act? I tried to get her to confess to me. But it was no good. At that 
moment I was in grave uncertainty. The Chief Constable was inclined to accept the dope 
smuggling explanation. I couldn’t let it go at that. I went over the facts again very carefully. 
I had, you see, a collection of jig‐saw puzzle pieces, isolated happenings—plain facts. The 
whole must fit into a complete and harmonious pattern. There were the scissors found on 
the beach—a bottle thrown from a window—a bath that no one would admit to having 
taken—all perfectly harmless occurrences in themselves, but rendered significant by the 
fact that no one would admit to them. Therefore, they must be of significance. Nothing 
about them fitted in with the theories of either Captain KennethMarshall’s or Linda’s, or of a dope 
gang’s being responsible. And yet they must have meaning. I went back again to my first 
solution—that  PatrickRedfern had committed the murder. Was there anything in support 
of that? Yes, the fact that a very large sum of money was missing from Arlena’s account. 
Who had got that money?  PatrickRedfern of course. She was the type of woman easily 
swindled by a handsome young man—but she was not at all the type of woman to be 
blackmailed. She was far too transparent, not good enough at keeping a secret. The 
blackmailer story had never rung true to my mind. And yet there had been that 
conversation overheard—ah, but overheard by whom?  PatrickRedfern’s wife. It was her 
story—unsupported by any outside evidence. Why was it invented? The answer came to 
me like lightning. To account for the absence of Arlena’s money!’ 

172  



‘PatrickRedfern and ChristineRedfern . The two of them were in it together. ChristineRedfern hadn’t got 
the physical strength to strangle her or the mental make up. No, it was  who had 
done it—but that was impossible! Every minute of his time was accounted for until the 
body was found.’ 

‘Body—the word stirred something in my mind—bodies lying on the beach—all alike. 
 PatrickRedfern and Emily Brewster had got to the Cove and seen a body lying there. A 
body—suppose it was not Arlena’s body but somebody else’s? The face was hidden by the 
great Chinese hat.’ 

‘But there was only one dead body—Arlena’s. Then, could it be—a live body—someone 
pretending to be dead? Could it be Arlena herself, inspired by PatrickRedfern to play some kind of 
a joke. I shook my head—no, too risky. A live body—whose? Was there any woman who 
would help PatrickRedfern? Of course—his wife. But she was a white‐skinned delicate creature. 
Ah yes, but suntan can be applied out of bottles—bottles—I had one of my jig‐saw pieces. 
Yes, and afterwards, of course, a bath—to wash that tell‐tale stain off before she went out 
to play tennis. And the scissors? Why, to cut up that duplicate cardboard hat—an 
unwieldy thing that must be got out of the way, and in the haste the scissors were left 
behind—the one thing that the pair of murderers forgot.’ 

‘But where was Arlena all the time? That again was perfectly clear. Either Rosamund 
Darnley or Arlena Marshall had been in the Pixy’s Cave, the scent they both used told me 
that. It was certainly not Rosamund Darnley. Then it was Arlena, hiding till the coast 
should clear.’ 

‘When Emily Brewster went off in the boat, PatrickRedfern had the beach to himself and full 
opportunity to commit the crime. Arlena Marshall was killed after a quarter to twelve, but 
the medical evidence was only concerned with the earliest possible time the crime could 
have been committed. That Arlena was dead at a quarter to twelve was what was told to 
the doctor, not what he told the police.’ 

‘Two more points had to be settled. Linda Marshall’s evidence gave ChristineRedfern  an 
alibi. Yes, but that evidence depended on Linda Marshall’s wristwatch. All that was needed 
was to prove that ChristineRedfern had had two opportunities of tampering with the watch. I 
found those easily enough. She had been alone in Linda’s room that morning—and there 
was an indirect proof. Linda was heard to say that she was “afraid she was going to be 
late”, but when she got down it was only twenty‐five past ten by the lounge clock. The 
second opportunity was easy—she could alter the watch back again as soon as Linda 
turned her back and went down to bathe.’ 

‘Then there was the question of the ladder. ChristineRedfern had always declared she had no head 
for heights. Another carefully prepared lie.’ 

‘I had my mosaic now—each piece beautifully fitted into its place. But, unfortunately, I 
had no definite proof. It was all in my mind.’ 

‘It was then that an idea came to me. There was an assurance—a slickness about the 
crime. I had no doubt that in the future  PatrickRedfern would repeat his crime. What 

 173 



about the past? It was remotely possible that this was not his first killing. The method 
employed, strangulation, was in harmony with his nature—a killer for pleasure as well as 
for profit. If he was already a murderer I was sure that he would have used the same 
means. I asked Inspector Colgate for a list of women victims of strangulation. The result 
filled me with joy. The death of Nellie Parson found strangled in a lonely copse might or 
might not be  PatrickRedfern’s work—it might merely have suggested choice of locality to 
him, but in Alice Corrigan’s death I found exactly what I was looking for. In essence the 
same method. Juggling with time—a murder committed not, as is the usual way, before it 
is supposed to have happened, but afterwards. A body supposedly discovered at a quarter 
past four. A husband with an alibi up to twenty‐five past four.’ 

‘What really happened? It was said that Edward Corrigan arrived at the Pine Ridge, found 
his wife not there, and went out and walked up and down. Actually, of course, he ran full 
speed to the rendezvous, Caesar’s Grove (which you will remember was quite nearby), 
killed her and returned to the café. The girl hiker who reported the crime was a most 
respectable young lady, games mistress in a well‐known girls’ school. Apparently she had 
no connection with Edward Corrigan. She had to walk some way to report the death. The 
police surgeon only examined the body at a quarter to six. As in this case the time of death 
was accepted without question.’ 

‘I made one final test. I must know definitely if Mrs ChristineRedfern was a liar. I arranged our little 
excursion to Dartmoor. If anyone has a bad head for heights, they are never comfortable 
crossing a narrow bridge over running water. Miss Brewster, a genuine sufferer, showed 
giddiness. But ChristineRedfern , unconcerned, ran across without a qualm. It was a small 
point, but it was a definite test. If she had told one unnecessary lie—then all the other lies 
were possible. In the meantime Colgate had got the photograph identified by the Surrey 
Police. I played my hand in the only way I thought likely to succeed. Having lulled  
PatrickRedfern into security, I turned on him and did my utmost to make him lose his self‐control. 
The knowledge that he had been identified with Corrigan caused him to lose his head 
completely.’ 

Hercule Poirot stroked his throat reminiscently. 

‘What I did,’ he said with importance, ‘was exceedingly dangerous—but I do not regret it. I 
succeeded! I did not suffer in vain.’ 

There was a moment’s silence. Then Mrs Gardener gave a deep sigh. 

‘Why, M. Poirot,’ she said. ‘It’s just been too wonderful—hearing just exactly how you got 
your results. It’s every bit as fascinating as a lecture on criminology—in fact it is a lecture 
on criminology. And to think my magenta wool and that sun‐bathing conversation actually 
had something to do with it? That really makes me too excited for words, and I’m sure Mr 
Gardener feels the same, don’t you, Odell?’ 

‘Yes, darling,’ said Mr Gardener. 

Hercule Poirot said: ‘Mr Gardener too was of assistance to me. I wanted the opinion of a 
sensible man about Mrs Marshall. I asked Mr Gardener what he thought of her.’ 

174  



‘Is that so,’ said Mrs Gardener. ‘And what did you say about her, Odell?’ 

Mr Gardener coughed. He said: ‘Well, darling, I never did think very much of her, you 
know.’ 

‘That’s the kind of thing men always say to their wives,’ said Mrs Gardener. ‘And if you ask 
me, even M. Poirot here is what I should call a shade on the indulgent side about her, 
calling her a natural victim and all that. Of course it’s true that she wasn’t a cultured 
woman at all, and as Captain KennethMarshall isn’t here I don’t mind saying that she always did 
seem to me kind of dumb. I said so to Mr Gardener, didn’t I, Odell?’ 

‘Yes, darling,’ said Mr Gardener. 

II 

Linda Marshall sat with Hercule Poirot on Gull Cove. 

She said: ‘Of course I’m glad I didn’t die after all. But you know, M. Poirot, it’s just the 
same as if I’d killed her, isn’t it? I meant to.’ 

Hercule Poirot said energetically: ‘It is not at all the same thing. The wish to kill and the 
action of killing are two different things. If in your bedroom instead of a little wax figure 
you had had your stepmother bound and helpless and a dagger in your hand instead of a 
pin, you would not have pushed it into her heart! Something within you would have said 
“no”. It is the same with me. I enrage myself at an imbecile. I say, “I would like to kick 
him.” Instead, I kick the table. I say, “This table, it is the imbecile, I kick him so.” And then, 
if I have not hurt my toe too much, I feel much better and the table it is not usually 
damaged. But if the imbecile himself was there I should not kick him. To make the wax 
figures and stick in the pins, it is silly, yes, it is childish, yes—but it does something useful 
too. You took the hate out of yourself and put it into that little figure. And with the pin and 
the fire you destroyed—not your stepmother—but the hate you bore her. Afterwards, 
even before you heard of her death, you felt cleansed, did you not—you felt lighter—
happier?’ 

Linda nodded. She said: ‘How did you know? That’s just how I did feel.’ 

Poirot said: ‘Then do not repeat to yourself the imbecilities. Just make up your mind not to 
hate your next stepmother.’ 

Linda said startled: ‘Do you think I’m going to have another? Oh, I see, you mean 
Rosamund. I don’t mind her.’ She hesitated a minute. ‘She’s sensible.’ 

It was not the adjective that Poirot himself would have selected for Rosamund Darnley, 
but he realized that it was Linda’s idea of high praise. 

III 

 175 



Kenneth said: ‘Rosamund, did you get some extraordinary idea into your head 
that I’d killed Arlena.’ 

Rosamund looked rather shamefaced. She said: ‘I suppose I was a damned fool.’ 

‘Of course you were.’ 

‘Yes, but Ken, you are such an oyster. I never knew what you really felt about Arlena. I 
didn’t know if you accepted her as she was and were just frightfully decent about her, or 
whether you—well, just believed in her blindly. And I thought if it was that, and you 
suddenly found out that she was letting you down you might go mad with rage. I’ve heard 
stories about you. You’re always very quiet but you’re rather frightening sometimes.’ 

‘So you thought I just took her by the throat and throttled the life out of her?’ 

‘Well—yes—that’s just exactly what I did think. And your alibi seemed a bit on the light 
side. That’s when I suddenly decided to take a hand, and made up that silly story about 
seeing you typing in your room. And when I heard that you said you’d seen me look in—
well, that made me quite sure you’d done it. That, and Linda’s queerness.’ 

Kenneth said with a sigh: ‘Don’t you realize that I said I’d seen you in the mirror 
in order to back up your story. I—I thought you needed it corroborated.’ 

Rosamund stared at him. 

‘You don’t mean you thought that I killed your wife?’ 

Kenneth shifted uneasily. He mumbled: ‘Dash it all, Rosamund, don’t you 
remember how you nearly killed that boy about that dog once? How you hung on to his 
throat and wouldn’t let go.’ 

‘But that was years ago.’ 

‘Yes, I know—’ 

Rosamund said sharply: ‘What earthly motive do you think I had to kill Arlena?’ 

His glance shifted. He mumbled something again. 

Rosamund cried: ‘Ken, you mass of conceit! You thought I killed her out of altruism on 
your behalf, did you? Or—did you think I killed her because I wanted you myself?’ 

‘Not at all,’ said Kenneth indignantly. ‘But you know what you said that day—
about Linda and everything—and—and you seemed to care what happened to me.’ 

Rosamund said: ‘I’ve always cared about that.’ 


‘I believe you have. You know, Rosamund—I can’t usually talk about things—I’m not good 
at talking—but I’d like to get this clear. I didn’t care for Arlena—only just a little at first—
and living with her day after day was a pretty nerve‐racking business. In fact it was 
absolute hell, but I was awfully sorry for her. She was such a damned fool—crazy about 
men—she just couldn’t help it—and they always let her down and treated her rottenly. I 
simply felt I couldn’t be the one to give her the final push. I’d married her and it was up to 
me to look after her as best I could. I think she knew that and was grateful to me really. 
She was—she was a pathetic sort of creature really.’ 

Rosamund said gently: ‘It’s all right, Ken. I understand now.’ 

Without looking at her Kenneth filled a pipe. He mumbled: ‘You’re—
pretty good at understanding, Rosamund.’ 

A faint smile curved Rosamund’s ironic mouth. She said: ‘Are you going to ask me to marry 
you now, Ken, or are you determined to wait six months?’ 

Kenneth’s pipe dropped from his lips and crashed on the rocks below. 

He said: ‘Damn, that’s the second pipe I’ve lost down here. And I haven’t got another with 
me. How the devil did you know I’d fixed six months as the proper time?’ 

‘I suppose because it is the proper time. But I’d rather have something definite now, 
please. Because in the intervening months you may come across some other persecuted 
female and rush to the rescue in chivalrous fashion again.’ 

He laughed. 

‘You’re going to be the persecuted female this time, Rosamund. You’re going to give up 
that damned dress‐making business of yours and we’re going to live in the country.’ 

‘Don’t you know that I make a very handsome income out of my business? Don’t you 
realize that it’s my business—that I created it and worked it up, and that I’m proud of it! 
And you’ve got the damned nerve to come along and say, “Give it all up, dear.”’ 

‘I’ve got the damned nerve to say it, yes.’ 

‘And you think I care enough for you to do it?’ 

‘If you don’t,’ said Kenneth, ‘you’d be no good to me.’ 

Rosamund said softly: ‘Oh, my dear, I’ve wanted to live in the country with you all my life. 
Now—it’s going to come true...’ 
                     The Mystery of the Blue Train




                    1. The Man with the White Hair


It was close on midnight when a man crossed the Place de la Concorde.
In spite of the handsome fur coat which garbed his meagre form, there
was something essentially weak and paltry about him.

A little man with a face like a rat. A man, one would say, who could
never play a conspicuous part, or rise to prominence in any sphere.
And yet, in leaping to such a conclusion, an onlooker would have been
wrong. For this man, negligible and inconspicuous as he seemed, played
a prominent part in the destiny of the world. In an Empire where rats
ruled, he was the king of the rats.

Even now, an Embassy awaited his return. But he had business to do
first--business of which the Embassy was not officially cognizant. His
face gleamed white and sharp in the moonlight. There was the least
hint of a curve in the thin nose. His father had been a Polish Jew, a
journeyman tailor. It was business such as his father would have loved
that took him abroad to-night.

He came to the Seine, crossed it, and entered one of the less reputable
quarters of Paris. Here he stopped before a tall, dilapidated house
and made his way up to an apartment on the fourth floor. He had barely
time to knock before the door was opened by a woman who had evidently
been awaiting his arrival. She gave him no greeting, but helped him
off with his overcoat and then led the way into the tawdrily furnished
sitting-room. The electric light was shaded with dirty pink festoons
and it softened, but could not disguise, the girl's face with its mask
of crude paint. Could not disguise, either, the broad Mongolian cast of
her countenance. There was no doubt of Olga Demiroff's profession, nor
of her nationality.

"All is well, little one?"

"All is well, Boris Ivanovitch."

He nodded murmuring: "I do not think I have been followed."

But there was anxiety in his tone. He went to the window, drawing the
curtains aside slightly, and peering carefully out. He started away
violently.

"There are two men--on the opposite pavement. It looks to me--" He
broke off and began gnawing at his nails--a habit he had when anxious.

The Russian girl was shaking her head with a slow, reassuring action.

"They were here before you came."

"All the same, it looks to me as though they were watching this house."

"Possibly," she admitted indifferently.

"But then--"

"What of it? Even if they _know_--it will not be _you_ they will follow
from here."

A thin, cruel smile came to his lips.

"No," he admitted, "that is true."

He mused for a minute or two and then observed:

"This damned American--he can look after himself as well as anybody."

"I suppose so."

He went again to the window.

"Tough customers," he muttered, with a chuckle. "Known to the police, I
fear. Well, well, I wish Brother Apache good hunting."

Olga Demiroff shook her head.

"If the American is the kind of man they say he is, it will take more
than a couple of cowardly apaches to get the better of him." She
paused. "I wonder--"

"Well?"

"Nothing. Only twice this evening a man has passed along this street--a
man with white hair."

"What of it?"

"This. As he passed those two men, he dropped his glove. One of them
picked it up and returned it to him. A thread-bare device."

"You mean--that the white-haired man is--their employer?"

"Something of the kind."

The Russian looked alarmed and uneasy.

"You are sure--the parcel is safe? It has not been tampered with? There
has been too much talk ... much too much talk."

He gnawed his nails again.

"Judge for yourself."

She bent to the fireplace, deftly removing the coals. Underneath, from
amongst the crumpled balls of newspaper, she selected from the very
middle an oblong package wrapped round with grimy newspaper, and handed
it to the man.

"Ingenious," he said, with a nod of approval.

"The apartment has been searched twice. The mattress on my bed was
ripped open."

"It is as I said," he muttered. "There has been too much talk. This
haggling over the price--it was a mistake."

He had unwrapped the newspaper. Inside was a small brown paper parcel.
This in turn he unwrapped, verified the contents, and quickly wrapped
it up once more. As he did so, an electric bell rang sharply.

"The American is punctual," said Olga, with a glance at the clock.

She left the room. In a minute she returned ushering in a stranger, a
big, broad-shouldered man whose transatlantic origin was evident. His
keen glance went from one to the other.

"M. Krassnine?" he inquired politely.

"I am he," said Boris. "I must apologize for--for the unconventionality
of this meeting-place. But secrecy is urgent. I--I cannot afford to be
connected with this business in any way."

"Is that so?" said the American politely.

"I have your word, have I not, that no details of this transaction will
be made public? That is one of the conditions of--sale."

The American nodded.

"That has already been agreed upon," he said indifferently. "Now,
perhaps, you will produce the goods."

"You have the money--in notes?"

"Yes," replied the other.

He did not, however, make any attempt to produce it. After a moment's
hesitation, Krassnine gestured towards the small parcel on the table.

The American took it up and unrolled the wrapping paper. The contents
he took over to a small electric lamp and submitted them to a very
thorough examination. Satisfied, he drew from his pocket a thick
leather wallet and extracted from it a wad of notes. These he handed to
the Russian, who counted them carefully.

"All right?"

"I thank you, Monsieur. Everything is correct."

"Ah!" said the other. He slipped the brown paper parcel negligently
into his pocket. He bowed to Olga. "Good evening, Mademoiselle. Good
evening, M. Krassnine."

He went out shutting the door behind him. The eyes of the two in the
room met. The man passed his tongue over his dry lips.

"I wonder--will he ever get back to his hotel?" he muttered.

By common accord, they both turned to the window. They were just in
time to see the American emerge into the street below. He turned to the
left and marched along at a good pace without once turning his head.
Two shadows stole from a doorway and followed noiselessly. Pursuers and
pursued vanished into the night. Olga Demiroff spoke.

"He will get back safely," she said. "You need not fear--or
hope--whichever it is."

"Why do you think he will be safe?" asked Krassnine curiously.

"A man who has made as much money as he has could not possibly be a
fool," said Olga. "And talking of money--"

She looked significantly at Krassnine.

"Eh?"

"My share, Boris Ivanovitch."

With some reluctance, Krassnine handed over two of the notes. She
nodded her thanks, with a complete lack of emotion, and tucked them
away in her stocking.

"That is good," she remarked, with satisfaction.

He looked at her curiously.

"You have no regrets, Olga Vassilovna?"

"Regrets? For what?"

"For what has been in your keeping. There are women--most women, I
believe, who go mad over such things."

She nodded reflectively.

"Yes, you speak truth there. Most women have that madness. I--have not.
I wonder now--" She broke off.

"Well?" asked the other curiously.

"The American will be safe with them--yes, I am sure of that. But
afterwards--"

"Eh? What are you thinking of?"

"He will give them, of course, to some woman," said Olga thoughtfully.
"I wonder what will happen then...."

She shook herself impatiently and went over to the window. Suddenly
she uttered an exclamation and called to her companion.

"See, he is going down the street now--the man I mean."

They both gazed down together. A slim, elegant figure was progressing
along at a leisurely pace. He wore an opera hat and a cloak. As he
passed a street lamp, the light illumined a thatch of thick white hair.




                           2. M. le Marquis


The man with the white hair continued on his course, unhurried, and
seemingly indifferent to his surroundings. He took a side turning to
the right and another one to the left. Now and then he hummed a little
air to himself.

Suddenly he stopped dead and listened intently. He had heard a certain
sound. It might have been the bursting of a tyre or it might have
been--a shot. A curious smile played round his lips for a minute. Then
he resumed his leisurely walk.

On turning a corner he came upon a scene of some activity. A
representative of the law was making notes in a pocket-book, and one or
two late passers-by had collected on the spot. To one of these the man
with the white hair made a polite request for information.

"Something has been happening, yes?"

"_Mais oui_, Monsieur. Two apaches set upon an elderly American
gentleman."

"They did him no injury?"

"No, indeed." The man laughed. "The American, he had a revolver in his
pocket, and before they could attack him, he fired shots so closely
round them that they took alarm and fled. The police, as usual, arrived
too late."

"Ah!" said the inquirer.

He displayed no emotion of any kind.

Placidly and unconcernedly he resumed his nocturnal strolling.
Presently he crossed the Seine and came into the richer areas of the
city. It was some twenty minutes later that he came to a stop before a
certain house in a quiet but aristocratic thoroughfare.

The shop, for shop it was, was a restrained and unpretentious one. D.
Papopolous, dealer in antiques, was so known to fame that he needed
no advertisement, and indeed most of his business was not done over
a counter. M. Papopolous had a very handsome apartment of his own
overlooking the Champs Élysées, and it might reasonably be supposed
that he would have been found there and not at his place of business
at such an hour, but the man with the white hair seemed confident of
success as he pressed the obscurely placed bell, having first given a
quick glance up and down the deserted street.

His confidence was not misplaced. The door opened and a man stood in
the aperture. He wore gold rings in his ears and was of a swarthy cast
of countenance.

"Good evening," said the stranger. "Your master is within?"

"The master is here, but he does not see chance visitors at this time
of night," growled the other.

"I think he will see me. Tell him that his friend M. le Marquis is
here."

The man opened the door a little wider and allowed the visitor to enter.

The man who gave his name as M. le Marquis had shielded his face
with his hand as he spoke. When the man-servant returned with the
information that M. Papopolous would be pleased to receive the visitor
a further change had taken place in the stranger's appearance. The
man-servant must have been very unobservant or very well trained for
he betrayed no surprise at the small black satin mask which hid the
other's features. Leading the way to a door at the end of the hall, he
opened it and announced in a respectful murmur: "_M. le Marquis_."

The figure which rose to receive this strange guest was an imposing
one. There was something venerable and patriarchal about M. Papopolous.
He had a high domed forehead and a beautiful white beard. His manner
had in it something ecclesiastical and benign.

"My dear friend," said M. Papopolous.

He spoke in French and his tones were rich and unctuous.

"I must apologize," said the visitor, "for the lateness of the hour."

"Not at all. Not at all," said M. Papopolous--"an interesting time of
night. You have had, perhaps, an interesting evening?"

"Not personally," said M. le Marquis.

"Not personally," repeated M. Papopolous, "no, no, of course not. And
there is news, eh?"

He cast a sharp glance sideways at the other, a glance that was not
ecclesiastical or benign in the least.

"There is no news. The attempt failed. I hardly expected anything else."

"Quite so," said M. Papopolous; "anything crude--"

He waved his hand to express his intense distaste for crudity in any
form. There was indeed nothing crude about M. Papopolous nor about the
goods he handled. He was well known in most European courts, and kings
called him Demetrius in a friendly manner. He had the reputation for
the most exquisite discretion. That, together with the nobility of his
aspect, had carried him through several very questionable transactions.

"The direct attack--" said M. Papopolous. He shook his head. "It
answers sometimes--but very seldom."

The other shrugged his shoulders.

"It saves time," he remarked, "and to fail costs nothing--or next to
nothing. The other plan--will not fail."

"Ah," said M. Papopolous, looking at him keenly.

The other nodded slowly.

"I have great confidence in your--er--reputation," said the antique
dealer.

M. le Marquis smiled gently.

"I think I may say," he murmured, "that your confidence will not be
misplaced."

"You have unique opportunities," said the other, with a note of envy in
his voice.

"I make them," said M. le Marquis.

He rose and took up the cloak which he had thrown carelessly on the
back of a chair.

"I will keep you informed, M. Papopolous, through the usual channels,
but there must be no hitch in your arrangements."

M. Papopolous was pained.

"There is _never_ a hitch in my arrangements," he complained.

The other smiled, and without any further word of adieu he left the
room, closing the door behind him.

M. Papopolous remained in thought for a moment stroking his venerable
white beard, and then moved across to a second door which opened
inwards. As he turned the handle, a young woman, who only too clearly
had been leaning against it with her ear to the keyhole, stumbled
headlong into the room. M. Papopolous displayed neither surprise nor
concern. It was evidently all quite natural to him.

"Well, Zia?" he asked.

"I did not hear him go," explained Zia.

She was a handsome young woman, built on Junoesque lines, with dark
flashing eyes and such a general air of resemblance to M. Papopolous
that it was easy to see they were father and daughter.

"It is annoying," she continued vexedly, "that one cannot see through a
keyhole and hear through it at the same time."

"It has often annoyed me," said M. Papopolous, with great simplicity.

"So that is M. le Marquis," said Zia slowly. "Does he always wear a
mask, father?"

"Always."

There was a pause.

"It is the rubies, I suppose?" asked Zia.

Her father nodded.

"What do you think, my little one?" he inquired, with a hint of
amusement in his beady black eyes.

"Of M. le Marquis?"

"Yes."

"I think," said Zia slowly, "that it is a very rare thing to find a
well-bred Englishman who speaks French as well as that."

"Ah," said M. Papopolous, "so that is what you think."

As usual, he did not commit himself, but he regarded Zia with benign
approval.

"I thought, too," said Zia, "that his head was an odd shape."

"Massive," said her father--"a trifle massive. But then that effect is
always created by a wig."

They both looked at each other and smiled.




                           3. Heart of Fire


Rufus Van Aldin passed through the revolving doors of the Savoy, and
walked to the reception desk. The desk clerk smiled a respectful
greeting.

"Pleased to see you back again, Mr. Van Aldin," he said.

The American millionaire nodded his head in a casual greeting.

"Everything all right?" he asked.

"Yes, sir.  MajorKnighton is upstairs in the suite now."

Van Aldin nodded again.

"Any mail?" he vouchsafed.

"They have all been sent up, Mr. Van Aldin. Oh! wait a minute."

He dived into a pigeon hole, and produced a letter.

"Just come this minute," he explained.

Rufus Van Aldin took the letter from him, and as he saw the
handwriting, a woman's flowing hand, his face was suddenly transformed.
The harsh contours of it softened, and the hard line of his mouth
relaxed. He looked a different man. He walked across to the lift with
the letter in his hand and the smile still on his lips.

In the drawing-room of his suite, a young man was sitting at a desk
nimbly sorting correspondence with the ease born of long practice. He
sprang up as Van Aldin entered.

"Hallo, MajorKnighton!"

"Glad to see you back, sir. Had a good time?"

"So-so!" said the millionaire unemotionally. "Paris is rather a
one-horse city nowadays. Still--I got what I went over for."

He smiled to himself rather grimly.

"You usually do, I believe," said the secretary, laughing.

"That's so," agreed the other.

He spoke in a matter-of-fact manner, as one stating a well-known fact.
Throwing off his heavy overcoat, he advanced to the desk.

"Anything urgent?"

"I don't think so, sir. Mostly the usual stuff. I have not quite
finished sorting it out."

Van Aldin nodded briefly. He was a man who seldom expressed either
blame or praise. His methods with those he employed were simple;
he gave them a fair trial and dismissed promptly those who were
inefficient. His selections of people were unconventional. MajorKnighton,
for instance, he had met casually at a Swiss resort two months
previously. He had approved of the fellow, looked up his war record,
and found in it the explanation of the limp with which he walked.
MajorKnighton had made no secret of the fact that he was looking for a
job, and indeed diffidently asked the millionaire if he knew of any
available post. Van Aldin remembered, with a grim smile of amusement,
the young man's complete astonishment when he had been offered the post
of secretary to the great man himself.

"But--but I have no experience of business," he had stammered.

"That doesn't matter a cuss," Van Aldin had replied. "I have got three
secretaries already to attend to that kind of thing. But I am likely
to be in England for the next six months, and I want an Englishman
who--well, knows the ropes--and can attend to the social side of things
for me."

So far, Van Aldin had found his judgment confirmed. MajorKnighton had proved
quick, intelligent, and resourceful, and he had a distinct charm of
manner.

The secretary indicated three or four letters placed by themselves on
the top of the desk.

"It might perhaps be as well, sir, if you glanced at these," he
suggested. "The top one is about the Colton agreement--"

But Rufus Van Aldin held up a protesting hand.

"I am not going to look at a durned thing to-night," he declared. "They
can all wait till the morning. Except this one," he added, looking down
at the letter he held in his hand. And again that strange transforming
smile stole over his face.

 MajorKnighton smiled sympathetically.

"Mrs. Kettering?" he murmured. "She rang up yesterday and to-day. She
seems very anxious to see you at once, sir."

"Does she, now!"

The smile faded from the millionaire's face. He ripped open the
envelope which he held in his hand and took out the enclosed sheet. As
he read it his face darkened, his mouth set grimly in the line which
Wall Street knew so well, and his brows knit themselves ominously.
MajorKnighton turned tactfully away, and went on opening letters and sorting
them. A muttered oath escaped the millionaire, and his clenched fist
hit the table sharply.

"I'll not stand for this," he muttered to himself. "Poor little girl,
it's a good thing she has her old father behind her."

He walked up and down the room for some minutes, his brows drawn
together in a scowl. MajorKnighton still bent assiduously over the desk.
Suddenly Van Aldin came to an abrupt halt. He took up his overcoat from
the chair where he had thrown it.

"Are you going out again, sir?"

"Yes; I'm going round to see my daughter."

"If Colton's people ring up--"

"Tell them to go to the devil," said Van Aldin.

"Very well," said the secretary unemotionally.

Van Aldin had his overcoat on by now. Cramming his hat upon his head,
he went towards the door. He paused with his hand upon the handle.

"You are a good fellow, MajorKnighton," he said. "You don't worry me when I
am rattled."

MajorKnighton smiled a little, but made no reply.

"Ruth is my only child," said Van Aldin, "and there is no one on this
earth who knows quite what she means to me."

A faint smile irradiated his face. He slipped his hand into his pocket.

"Care to see something, MajorKnighton?"

He came back towards the secretary.

From his pocket he drew out a parcel carelessly wrapped in brown paper.
He tossed off the wrapping and disclosed a big, shabby, red velvet
case. In the centre of it were some twisted initials surmounted by a
crown. He snapped the case open, and the secretary drew in his breath
sharply. Against the slightly dingy white of the interior, the stones
glowed like blood.

"My God! sir," said MajorKnighton. "Are they--are they real?"

Van Aldin laughed a quiet little cackle of amusement.

"I don't wonder at your asking that. Amongst these rubies are the three
largest in the world. Catherine of Russia wore them, MajorKnighton. That
centre one there is known as Heart of Fire. It's perfect--not a flaw in
it."

"But," the secretary murmured, "they must be worth a fortune."

"Four or five hundred thousand dollars," said Van Aldin nonchalantly,
"and that is apart from the historical interest."

"And you carry them about--like that, loose in your pocket?"

Van Aldin laughed amusedly.

"I guess so. You see, they are my little present for Ruthie."

The secretary smiled discreetly.

"I can understand now Mrs. Kettering's anxiety over the telephone," he
murmured.

But Van Aldin shook his head. The hard look returned to his face.

"You are wrong there," he said. "She doesn't know about these; they are
my little surprise for her."

He shut the case, and began slowly to wrap it up again.

"It's a hard thing, MajorKnighton," he said, "how little one can do for
those one loves. I can buy a good portion of the earth for Ruth, if it
would be any use to her, but it isn't. I can hang these things round
her neck and give her a moment or two's pleasure, maybe, but--"

He shook his head.

"When a woman is not happy in her home--"

He left the sentence unfinished. The secretary nodded discreetly. He
knew, none better, the reputation of the Hon. DerekKettering . Van
Aldin sighed. Slipping the parcel back in his coat pocket, he nodded to
MajorKnighton and left the room.




                          4. In Curzon Street


The Hon. Mrs. DerekKettering Kettering lived in Curzon Street. The butler who
opened the door recognized Rufus Van Aldin at once and permitted
himself a discreet smile of greeting. He led the way upstairs to the
big double drawing-room on the first floor.

A woman who was sitting by the window started up with a cry.

"Why, Dad, if that isn't too good for anything! I've been telephoning
MajorKnighton all day to try and get hold of you, but he couldn't say
for sure when you were expected back."

Ruth Kettering was twenty-eight years of age. Without being beautiful,
or in the real sense of the word even pretty, she was striking looking
because of her colouring. Van Aldin had been called Carrots and Ginger
in his time, and Ruth's hair was almost pure auburn. With it went dark
eyes and very black lashes--the effect somewhat enhanced by art. She
was tall and slender, and moved well. At a careless glance it was the
face of a Raphael Madonna. Only if one looked closely did one perceive
the same line of jaw and chin as in Van Aldin's face, bespeaking the
same hardness and determination. It suited the man, but suited the
woman less well. From her childhood upward Ruth Van Aldin had been
accustomed to having her own way, and any one who had ever stood up
against her soon realized that Rufus Van Aldin's daughter never gave in.

"MajorKnighton told me you'd 'phoned him," said Van Aldin. "I only got back
from Paris half an hour ago. What's all this about DerekKettering?"

Ruth Kettering flushed angrily.

"It's unspeakable. It's beyond all limits," she cried. "He--he doesn't
seem to listen to anything I say."

There was bewilderment as well as anger in her voice.

"He'll listen to me," said the millionaire grimly.

Ruth went on.

"I've hardly seen him for the last month. He goes about everywhere with
that woman."

"With what woman?"

"Mirelle. She dances at the Parthenon, you know."

Van Aldin nodded.

"I was down at Leconbury last week. I--I spoke to Lord Leconbury. He
was awfully sweet to me, sympathized entirely. He said he'd give DerekKettering
a good talking to."

"Ah!" said Van Aldin.

"What do you mean by 'Ah!', Dad?"

"Just what you think I mean, Ruthie. Poor old Leconbury is a wash-out.
Of course he sympathized with you, of course he tried to soothe you
down. Having got his son and heir married to the daughter of one of the
richest men in the States, he naturally doesn't want to mess the thing
up. But he's got one foot in the grave already, every one knows that,
and anything he may say will cut darned little ice with DerekKettering."

"Can't _you_ do anything, Dad?" urged Ruth, after a minute or two.

"I might," said the millionaire. He waited a second reflectively, and
then went on. "There are several things I might do, but there's only
one that will be any real good. How much pluck have you got, Ruthie?"

She stared at him. He nodded back at her.

"I mean just what I say. Have you got the grit to admit to all the
world that you've made a mistake? There's only one way out of this
mess, Ruthie. Cut your losses and start afresh."

"You mean--"

"Divorce."

"Divorce!"

Van Aldin smiled drily.

"You say that word, Ruth, as though you'd never heard it before. And
yet your friends are doing it all round you every day."

"Oh! I know that. But--"

She stopped, biting her lip. Her father nodded comprehendingly.

"I know, Ruth. You're like me, you can't bear to let go. But I've
learnt, and you've got to learn, that there are times when it's the
only way. I might find ways of whistling DerekKettering back to you, but it
would all come to the same in the end. _He's no good_, Ruth; he's
rotten through and through. And mind you, I blame myself for ever
letting you marry him. But you were kind of set on having him, and he
seemed in earnest about turning over a new leaf--and well, I'd crossed
you once, honey...."

He did not look at her as he said the last words. Had he done so, he
might have seen the swift colour that came up in her face.

"You did," she said in a hard voice.

"I was too darned softhearted to do it a second time. I can't tell you
how I wish I had, though. You've led a poor kind of life for the last
few years, Ruth."

"It has not been very--agreeable," agreed Mrs. Kettering.

"That's why I say to you that this thing has got to _stop_!" He brought
his hand down with a bang on the table. "You may have a hankering after
the fellow still. _Cut it out._ Face facts. DerekKettering  married you
for your money. That's all there is to it. Get rid of him, Ruth."

Ruth Kettering looked down at the ground for some moments, then she
said, without raising her head:

"Supposing he doesn't consent?"

Van Aldin looked at her in astonishment.

"He won't have a say in the matter."

She flushed and bit her lip.

"No--no--of course not. I only meant--"

She stopped. Her father eyed her keenly.

"What did you mean?"

"I meant--" She paused, choosing her words carefully. "He mayn't take
it lying down."

The millionaire's chin shot out grimly.

"You mean he'll fight the case? Let him! But, as a matter of fact,
you're wrong. He won't fight. Any solicitor he consults will tell him
he hasn't a leg to stand upon."

"You don't think"--she hesitated--"I mean--out of sheer spite against
me--he might, try to make it awkward?"

Her father looked at her in some astonishment.

"Fight the case, you mean?"

He shook his head.

"Very unlikely. You see, he would have to have something to go upon."

Mrs. Kettering did not answer. Van Aldin looked at her sharply.

"Come, Ruth, out with it. There's something troubling you--what is it?"

"Nothing, nothing at all."

But her voice was unconvincing.

"You are dreading the publicity, eh? Is that it? You leave it to me.
I'll put the whole thing through so smoothly that there will be no fuss
at all."

"Very well, Dad, if you really think it's the best thing to be done."

"Got a fancy for the fellow still, Ruth? Is that it?"

"No."

The word came with no uncertain emphasis. Van Aldin seemed satisfied.
He patted his daughter on the shoulder.

"It will be all right, little girl. Don't you worry any. Now let's
forget all about this. I have brought you a present from Paris."

"For me? Something very nice?"

"I hope you'll think so," said Van Aldin, smiling.

He took the parcel from his coat pocket and handed it to her. She
unwrapped it eagerly, and snapped open the case. A long-drawn "Oh!"
came from her lips. Ruth Kettering loved jewels--always had done so.

"Dad, how--how wonderful!"

"Rather in a class by themselves, aren't they?" said the millionaire,
with satisfaction. "You like them, eh?"

"Like them? Dad, they're unique. How did you get hold of them?"

Van Aldin smiled.

"Ah! that's my secret. They had to be bought privately, of course. They
are rather well known. See that big stone in the middle? You have heard
of it, maybe; that's the historic 'Heart of Fire.'"

"Heart of Fire!" repeated Mrs. Kettering.

She had taken the stones from the case and was holding them against
her breast. The millionaire watched her. He was thinking of the series
of women who had worn the jewels. The heartaches, the despairs, the
jealousies. "Heart of Fire," like all famous stones, had left behind
it a trail of tragedy and violence. Held in Ruth Kettering's assured
hand, it seemed to lose its potency of evil. With her cool, equable
poise, this woman of the western world seemed a negation to tragedy or
heart-burnings. Ruth returned the stones to their case; then, jumping
up, she flung her arms round her father's neck.

"Thank you, thank you, thank you, Dad! They are wonderful! You do give
me the most marvellous presents always."

"That's all right," said Van Aldin, patting her shoulder. "You are all
I have, you know, Ruthie."

"You will stay to dinner, won't you, father?"

"I don't think so. You were going out, weren't you?"

"Yes, but I can easily put that off. Nothing very exciting."

"No," said Van Aldin. "Keep your engagement. I have got a good deal to
attend to. See you to-morrow, my dear. Perhaps if I 'phone you, we can
meet at Galbraiths'?"

Messrs. Galbraith, Galbraith, Cuthbertson, & Galbraith were Van Aldin's
London solicitors.

"Very well, Dad." She hesitated. "I suppose it--this--won't keep me
from going to the Riviera?"

"When are you off?"

"On the fourteenth."

"Oh, that will be all right. These things take a long time to mature.
By the way, Ruth, I shouldn't take those rubies abroad if I were you.
Leave them at the bank."

Mrs. Kettering nodded.

"We don't want to have you robbed and murdered for the sake of 'Heart
of Fire,'" said the millionaire jocosely.

"And yet you carried it about in your pocket loose," retorted his
daughter, smiling.

"Yes--"

Something, some hesitation, caught her attention.

"What is it, Dad?"

"Nothing." He smiled. "Thinking of a little adventure of mine in Paris."

"An adventure?"

"Yes, the night I bought these things."

He made a gesture towards the jewel case.

"Oh, do tell me."

"Nothing to tell, Ruthie. Some apache fellows got a bit fresh and I
shot at them and they got off. That's all."

She looked at him with some pride.

"You're a tough proposition, Dad."

"You bet I am, Ruthie."

He kissed her affectionately and departed. On arriving back at the
Savoy, he gave a curt order to MajorKnighton.

"Get hold of a man called Goby; you'll find his address in my private
book. He's to be here to-morrow morning at half-past nine."

"Yes, sir."

"I also want to see DerekKettering. Run him to earth for me if you can.
Try his Club--at any rate, get hold of him somehow, and arrange for me
to see him here to-morrow morning. Better make it latish, about twelve.
His sort aren't early risers."

The secretary nodded in comprehension of these instructions. Van Aldin
gave himself into the hands of his valet. His bath was prepared, and
as he lay luxuriating in the hot water, his mind went back over the
conversation with his daughter. On the whole he was well satisfied. His
keen mind had long since accepted the fact that divorce was the only
possible way out. Ruth had agreed to the proposed solution with more
readiness than he had hoped for. Yet, in spite of her acquiescence, he
was left with a vague sense of uneasiness. Something about her manner,
he felt, had not been quite natural. He frowned to himself.

"Maybe I'm fanciful," he muttered, "and yet--I bet there's something
she has not told me."




                         5. A Useful Gentleman


Rufus Van Aldin had just finished the sparse breakfast of coffee and
dry toast, which was all he ever allowed himself, when MajorKnighton entered
the room.

"Mr. Goby is below, sir, waiting to see you."

The millionaire glanced at the clock. It was just half-past nine.

"All right," he said curtly. "He can come up."

A minute or two later, Mr. Goby entered the room. He was a small,
elderly man, shabbily dressed, with eyes that looked carefully all
round the room, and never at the person he was addressing.

"Good morning, Goby," said the millionaire. "Take a chair."

"Thank you, Mr. Van Aldin."

Mr. Goby sat down with his hands on his knees, and gazed earnestly at
the radiator.

"I have got a job for you."

"Yes, Mr. Van Aldin?"

"My daughter is married to the Hon. DerekKettering, as you may perhaps
know."

Mr. Goby transferred his gaze from the radiator to the left-hand drawer
of the desk, and permitted a deprecating smile to pass over his face.
Mr. Goby knew a great many things, but he always hated to admit the
fact.

"By my advice, she is about to file a petition for divorce. That, of
course, is a solicitor's business. But, for private reasons, I want the
fullest and most complete information."

Mr. Goby looked at the cornice and murmured:

"About DerekKettering?"

"About DerekKettering."

"Very good, sir."

Mr. Goby rose to his feet.

"When will you have it ready for me?"

"Are you in a hurry, sir?"

"I'm always in a hurry," said the millionaire.

Mr. Goby smiled understandingly at the fender.

"Shall we say two o'clock this afternoon, sir?" he asked.

"Excellent," approved the other. "Good morning, Goby."

"Good morning, Mr. Van Aldin."

"That's a very useful man," said the millionaire as Goby went out and
his secretary came in. "In his own line he's a specialist."

"What is his line?"

"Information. Give him twenty-four hours and he would lay the private
life of the Archbishop of Canterbury bare for you."

"A useful sort of chap," said MajorKnighton, with a smile.

"He has been useful to me once or twice," said Van Aldin. "Now then,
MajorKnighton, I'm ready for work."

The next few hours saw a vast quantity of business rapidly transacted.
It was half-past twelve when the telephone bell rang, and Mr. Van Aldin
was informed that DerekKettering had called. MajorKnighton looked at Van
Aldin, and interpreted his brief nod.

"Ask DerekKettering to come up, please."

The secretary gathered up his papers and departed. He and the visitor
passed each other in the doorway, and DerekKettering stood aside to
let the other go out. Then he came in, shutting the door behind him.

"Good morning, sir. You are very anxious to see me, I hear."

The lazy voice with its slightly ironic inflection roused memories in
Van Aldin. There was charm in it--there had always been charm in it. He
looked piercingly at his son-in-law. DerekKettering was thirty-four,
lean of build, with a dark, narrow face, which had even now something
indescribably boyish in it.

"Come in," said Van Aldin curtly. "Sit down."

DerekKettering flung himself lightly into an arm-chair. He looked at his
father-in-law with a kind of tolerant amusement.

"Not seen you for a long time, sir," he remarked pleasantly. "About two
years, I should say. Seen Ruth yet?"

"I saw her last night," said Van Aldin.

"Looking very fit, isn't she?" said the other lightly.

"I didn't know you had had much opportunity of judging," said Van Aldin
drily.

DerekKettering  raised his eyebrows.

"Oh, we sometimes meet at the same night club, you know," he said
airily.

"I am not going to beat about the bush," Van Aldin said curtly. "I have
advised Ruth to file a petition for divorce."

DerekKettering  seemed unmoved.

"How drastic!" he murmured. "Do you mind if I smoke, sir?"

He lit a cigarette, and puffed out a cloud of smoke as he added
nonchalantly:

"And what did Ruth say?"

"Ruth proposes to take my advice," said her father.

"Does she really?"

"Is that all you have got to say?" demanded Van Aldin sharply.

DerekKettering flicked his ash into the grate.

"I think, you know," he said, with a detached air, "that she's making a
great mistake."

"From your point of view she doubtless is," said Van Aldin grimly.

"Oh, come now," said the other; "don't let's be personal. I really
wasn't thinking of myself at the moment. I was thinking of Ruth. You
know my poor old Governor really can't last much longer; all the
doctors say so. Ruth had better give it a couple more years, then I
shall be Lord Leconbury, and she can be châtelaine of Leconbury, which
is what she married me for."

"I won't have any of your darned impudence," roared Van Aldin.

DerekKettering  smiled at him quite unmoved.

"I agree with you. It's an obsolete idea," he said. "There's nothing
in a title nowadays. Still, Leconbury is a very fine old place, and,
after all, we are one of the oldest families in England. It will be
very annoying for Ruth if she divorces me to find me marrying again,
and some other woman queening it at Leconbury instead of her."

"I am serious, young man," said Van Aldin.

"Oh, so am I," said DerekKettering. "I am in very low water financially; it
will put me in a nasty hole if Ruth divorces me, and, after all, if she
has stood it for ten years, why not stand it a little longer? I give
you my word of honour that the old man can't possibly last out another
eighteen months, and, as I said before, it's a pity Ruth shouldn't get
what she married me for."

"You suggest that my daughter married you for your title and position?"

DerekKettering  laughed a laugh that was not all amusement.

"You don't think it was a question of a love match?" he asked.

"I know," said Van Aldin slowly, "that you spoke very differently in
Paris ten years ago."

"Did I? Perhaps I did. Ruth was very beautiful, you know--rather like
an angel or a saint, or something that had stepped down from a niche
in a church. I had fine ideas, I remember, of turning over a new leaf,
of settling down and living up to the highest traditions of English
home-life with a beautiful wife who loved me."

He laughed again, rather more discordantly.

"But you don't believe that, I suppose?" he said.

"I have no doubt at all that you married Ruth for her money," said Van
Aldin unemotionally.

"And that she married me for love?" asked the other ironically.

"Certainly," said Van Aldin.

DerekKettering stared at him for a minute or two, then he nodded
reflectively.

"I see you believe that," he said. "So did I at the time. I can assure
you, my dear father-in-law, I was very soon undeceived."

"I don't know what you are getting at," said Van Aldin, "and I don't
care. You have treated Ruth darned badly."

"Oh, I have," agreed DerekKettering lightly, "but she's tough, you know.
She's your daughter. Underneath the pink-and-white softness of her
she's as hard as granite. You have always been known as a hard man, so
I have been told, but Ruth is harder than you are. You, at any rate,
love one person better than yourself. Ruth never has and never will."

"That is enough," said Van Aldin. "I asked you here so that I could
tell you fair and square what I meant to do. My girl has got to have
some happiness, and remember this, I am behind her."

DerekKettering  got up and stood by the mantelpiece. He tossed away his
cigarette. When he spoke, his voice was very quiet.

"What exactly do you mean by that, I wonder?" he said.

"I mean," said Van Aldin, "that you had better not try to defend the
case."

"Oh," said DerekKettering. "Is that a threat?"

"You can take it any way you please," said Van Aldin.

DerekKettering drew a chair up to the table. He sat down fronting the
millionaire.

"And supposing," he said softly, "that, just for argument's sake, I did
defend the case?"

Van Aldin shrugged his shoulders.

"You have not got a leg to stand upon, you young fool. Ask your
solicitors, they will soon tell you. Your conduct has been notorious,
the talk of London."

"Ruth has been kicking up a row about Mirelle, I suppose. Very foolish
of her. I don't interfere with her friends."

"What do you mean?" said Van Aldin sharply.

DerekKettering  laughed.

"I see you don't know everything sir," he said. "You are, perhaps
naturally, prejudiced."

He took up his hat and stick and moved towards the door.

"Giving advice is not much in my line." He delivered his final thrust.
"But, in this case, I should advise most strongly perfect frankness
between father and daughter."

He passed quickly out of the room and shut the door behind him just as
the millionaire sprang up.

"Now, what the hell did he mean by that?" said Van Aldin as he sank
back into his chair again.

All his uneasiness returned in full force. There was something here
that he had not yet got to the bottom of. The telephone was by his
elbow; he seized it, and asked for the number of his daughter's house.

"Hallo! Hallo! Is that Mayfair 81907? Mrs. Kettering in? Oh, she's
out, is she? Yes, out to lunch. What time will she be in? You don't
know? Oh, very good; no, there's no message."

He slammed the receiver down again angrily. At two o'clock he was
pacing the floor of his room waiting expectantly for Goby. The latter
was ushered in at ten minutes past two.

"Well?" barked the millionaire sharply.

But little Mr. Goby was not to be hurried. He sat down at the table,
produced a very shabby pocket-book, and proceeded to read from it
in a monotonous voice. The millionaire listened attentively, with
an increasing satisfaction. Goby came to a full stop, and looked
attentively at the wastepaper-basket.

"Um!" said Van Aldin. "That seems pretty definite. The case will go
through like winking. The hotel evidence is all right, I suppose?"

"Cast iron," said Mr. Goby, and looked malevolently at a gilt arm-chair.

"And financially he's in very low water. He's trying to raise a
loan now, you say? Has already raised practically all he can upon
his expectations from his father. Once the news of the divorce gets
about, he won't be able to raise another cent, and not only that, his
obligations can be bought up and pressure can be put upon him from that
quarter. We have got him, Goby; we have got him in a cleft stick."

He hit the table a bang with his fist. His face was grim and triumphant.

"The information," said Mr. Goby in a thin voice, "seems satisfactory."

"I have got to go round to Curzon Street now," said the millionaire. "I
am much obliged to you, Goby. You are the goods all right."

A pale smile of gratification showed itself on the little man's face.

"Thank you, Mr. Van Aldin," he said; "I try to do my best."

Van Aldin did not go direct to Curzon Street. He went first to the
City, where he had two interviews which added to his satisfaction. From
there he took the tube to Down Street. As he was walking along Curzon
Street, a figure came out of No. 160, and turned up the street towards
him, so that they passed each other on the pavement. For a moment,
the millionaire had fancied it might be DerekKettering  himself; the
height and build were not unlike. But as they came face to face, he saw
that the man was a stranger to him. At least--no, not a stranger; his
face awoke some call of recognition in the millionaire's mind, and it
was associated definitely with something unpleasant. He cudgelled his
brains in vain, but the thing eluded him. He went on, shaking his head
irritably. He hated to be baffled.

Ruth Kettering was clearly expecting him. She ran to him and kissed him
when he entered.

"Well, Dad, how are things going?"

"Very well," said Van Aldin; "but I have got a word or two to say to
you, Ruth."

Almost insensibly he felt the change in her; something shrewd and
watchful replaced the impulsiveness of her greeting. She sat down in a
big arm-chair.

"Well, Dad?" she asked. "What is it?"

"I saw your husband this morning," said Van Aldin.

"You saw DerekKettering?"

"I did. He said a lot of things, most of which were darned cheek. Just
as he was leaving, he said something that I didn't understand. He
advised me to be sure that there was perfect frankness between father
and daughter. What did he mean by that, Ruthie?"

Mrs. Kettering moved a little in her chair.

"I--I don't know, Dad. How should I?"

"Of course you know," said Van Aldin. "He said something else, about
his having his friends and not interfering with yours. What did he mean
by that?"

"I don't know," said Ruth Kettering again.

Van Aldin sat down. His mouth set itself in a grim line.

"See here, Ruth. I am not going into this with my eyes closed. I am not
at all sure that that husband of yours doesn't mean to make trouble.
Now, he can't do it, I am sure of that. I have got the means to silence
him, to shut his mouth for good and all, but I have got to know if
there's any need to use those means. What did he mean by your having
your own friends?"

Mrs. Kettering shrugged her shoulders.

"I have got lots of friends," she said uncertainly. "I don't know what
he meant, I am sure."

"You do," said Van Aldin.

He was speaking now as he might have spoken to a business adversary.

"I will put it plainer. Who is the man?"

"What man?"

"_The_ man. That's what DerekKettering was driving at. Some special man who is
a friend of yours. You needn't worry, honey, I know there is nothing
in it, but we have got to look at everything as it might appear to the
Court. They can twist these things about a good deal, you know. I want
to know who the man is, and just how friendly you have been with him."

Ruth didn't answer. Her hands were kneading themselves together in
intense nervous absorption.

"Come, honey," said Van Aldin in a softer voice. "Don't be afraid of
your old Dad. I was not too harsh, was I, even that time in Paris?--By
gosh!"

He stopped, thunderstruck.

"That's who it was," he murmured to himself. "I thought I knew his
face."

"What are you talking about, Dad? I don't understand."

The millionaire strode across to her and took her firmly by the wrist.

"See here, Ruth, have you been seeing that fellow again?"

"What fellow?"

"The one we had all that fuss about years ago. You know who I mean well
enough."

"You mean"--she hesitated--"you mean the Comte de la Roche?"

"Comte de la Roche!" snorted Van Aldin. "I told you at the time that
the man was no better than a swindler. You had entangled yourself with
him then very deeply, but I got you out of his clutches."

"Yes, you did," said Ruth bitterly. "And I married DerekKettering ."

"You wanted to," said the millionaire sharply.

She shrugged her shoulders.

"And now," said Van Aldin slowly, "you have been seeing him
again--after all I told you. He has been in the house to-day. I met him
outside, and couldn't place him for the moment."

Ruth Kettering had recovered her composure.

"I want to tell you one thing, Dad; you are wrong about Armand--the
Comte de la Roche, I mean. Oh, I know there were several regrettable
incidents in his youth--he has told me about them; but--well, he has
cared for me always. It broke his heart when you parted us in Paris,
and now--"

She was interrupted by the snort of indignation her father gave.

"So you fell for that stuff, did you? You, a daughter of mine! My God!"

He threw up his hands.

"That women can be such darned fools!"




                              6. Mirelle


DerekKettering  emerged from Van Aldin's suite so precipitantly that he
collided with a lady passing across the corridor. He apologized, and
she accepted his apologies with a smiling reassurance and passed on,
leaving with him a pleasant impression of a soothing personality and
rather fine grey eyes.

For all his nonchalance, his interview with his father-in-law had
shaken him more than he cared to show. He had a solitary lunch, and
after it, frowning to himself a little, he went around to the sumptuous
flat that housed the lady known as Mirelle. A trim Frenchwoman received
him with smiles.

"But enter then, Monsieur. Madame reposes herself."

He was ushered into the long room with its Eastern setting which
he knew so well. Mirelle was lying on the divan, supported by an
incredible number of cushions, all in varying shades of amber, to
harmonize with the yellow ochre of her complexion. The dancer was a
beautifully made woman, and if her face, beneath its mask of yellow,
was in truth somewhat haggard, it had a bizarre charm of its own, and
her orange lips smiled invitingly at DerekKettering .

He kissed her, and flung himself into a chair.

"What have you been doing with yourself? Just got up, I suppose?"

The orange mouth widened into a long smile.

"No," said the dancer. "I have been at work."

She flung out a long, pale hand towards the piano, which was littered
with untidy music scores.

"Ambrose has been here. He has been playing me the new Opera."

DerekKettering nodded without paying much attention. He was profoundly
uninterested in Claud Ambrose and the latter's operatic setting of
Ibsen's _Peer Gynt_. So was Mirelle, for that matter, regarding it
merely as a unique opportunity for her own presentation as Anitra.

"It is a marvellous dance," she murmured. "I shall put all the passion
of the desert into it. I shall dance hung over with jewels--ah! and,
by the way, _mon ami_, there is a pearl that I saw yesterday in Bond
Street--a black pearl."

She paused, looking at him invitingly.

"My dear girl," said DerekKettering, "it's no use talking of black pearls to
me. At the present minute, as far as I am concerned, the fat is in the
fire."

She was quick to respond to his tone. She sat up, her big black eyes
widening.

"What is that you say, Dereek? What has happened?"

"My esteemed father-in-law," said DerekKettering, "is preparing to go off
the deep-end."

"Eh?"

"In other words, he wants Ruth to divorce me."

"How stupid!" said Mirelle. "Why should she want to divorce you?"

DerekKettering grinned.

"Mainly because of you, _chérie_!" he said.

Mirelle shrugged her shoulders.

"That is foolish," she observed in a matter-of-fact voice.

"Very foolish," agreed DerekKettering.

"What are you going to do about it?" demanded Mirelle.

"My dear girl, what can I do? On the one side, the man with unlimited
money; on the other side, the man with unlimited debts. There is no
question as to who will come out on top."

"They are extraordinary, these Americans," commented Mirelle. "It is
not as though your wife were fond of you."

"Well," said DerekKettering, "what are we going to do about it?"

She looked at him inquiringly. He came over and took both her hands in
his.

"Are you going to stick to me?"

"What do you mean? After--"

"Yes," said DerekKettering. "After, when the creditors come down like wolves
on the fold. I am damned fond of you, Mirelle; are you going to let me
down?"

She pulled her hands away from him.

"You know I adore you, Dereek."

He caught the note of evasion in her voice.

"So that's that, is it? The rats will leave the sinking ship."

"Ah, Dereek!"

"Out with it," he said violently. "You will fling me over; is that it?"

She shrugged her shoulders.

"I am fond of you, _mon ami_--indeed I am fond of you. You are very
charming--_un beau garçon_, but _ce n'est pas pratique_."

"You are a rich man's luxury, eh? Is that it?"

"If you like to put it that way."

She leaned back on the cushions, her head flung back.

"All the same, I am fond of you, Dereek."

He went over to the window and stood there some time looking out, with
his back to her. Presently the dancer raised herself on her elbow and
stared at him curiously.

"What are you thinking of, _mon ami_?"

He grinned at her over his shoulder, a curious grin, that made her
vaguely uneasy.

"As it happened, I was thinking of a woman, my dear."

"A woman, eh?"

Mirelle pounced on something that she could understand.

"You are thinking of some other woman, is that it?"

"Oh, you needn't worry; it is purely a fancy portrait. 'Portrait of a
lady with grey eyes.'"

Mirelle said sharply, "When did you meet her?"

DerekKettering laughed, and his laughter had a mocking, ironical sound.

"I ran into the lady in the corridor of the Savoy Hotel."

"Well! What did she say?"

"As far as I can remember, I said, 'I beg your pardon,' and she said,
'It doesn't matter,' or words to that effect."

"And then?" persisted the dancer.

DerekKettering shrugged his shoulders.

"And then--nothing. That was the end of the incident."

"I don't understand a word of what you are talking about," declared the
dancer.

"Portrait of a lady with grey eyes," murmured DerekKettering reflectively. "Just
as well I am never likely to meet her again."

"Why?"

"She might bring me bad luck. Women do."

Mirelle slipped quickly from her couch, and came across to him, laying
one long, snake-like arm round his neck.

"You are foolish, Dereek," she murmured. "You are very foolish. You
are _beau garçon_, and I adore you, but I am not made to be poor--no,
decidedly I am not made to be poor. Now listen to me; everything is
very simple. You must make it up with your wife."

"I am afraid that's not going to be actually in the sphere of practical
politics," said DerekKettering drily.

"How do you say? I do not understand."

"Van Aldin, my dear, is not taking any. He is the kind of man who makes
up his mind and sticks to it."

"I have heard of him," nodded the dancer. "He is very rich, is he not?
Almost the richest man in America. A few days ago, in Paris, he bought
the most wonderful ruby in the world--'Heart of Fire' it is called."

DerekKettering did not answer. The dancer went on musingly:

"It is a wonderful stone--a stone that should belong to a woman like
me. I love jewels, Dereek; they say something to me. Ah! to wear a ruby
like 'Heart of Fire.'"

She gave a little sigh, and then became practical once more.

"You don't understand these things, Dereek; you are only a man. Van
Aldin will give these rubies to his daughter, I suppose. Is she his
only child?"

"Yes."

"Then when he dies, she will inherit all his money. She will be a rich
woman."

"She is a rich woman already," said DerekKettering drily. "He settled a
couple of millions on her at her marriage."

"A couple of millions! But that is immense. And if she died suddenly,
eh? That would all come to you?"

"As things stand at present," said DerekKettering slowly, "it would. As far
as I know she has not made a will."

"_Mon Dieu!_" said the dancer. "If she were to die, what a solution
that would be."

There was a moment's pause, and then DerekKettering laughed outright.

"I like your simple, practical mind, Mirelle, but I am afraid what you
desire won't come to pass. My wife is an extremely healthy person."

"_Eh, bien!_" said Mirelle; "there are accidents."

He looked at her sharply but did not answer.

She went on.

"But you are right, _mon ami_, we must not dwell on possibilities. See
now, my little Dereek, there must be no more talk of this divorce. Your
wife must give up the idea."

"And if she won't?"

The dancer's eyes narrowed to slits.

"I think she will, my friend. She is one of those who would not like
the publicity. There are one or two pretty stories that she would not
like her friends to read in the newspapers."

"What do you mean?" asked DerekKettering sharply.

Mirelle laughed, her head thrown back.

"_Parbleu!_ I mean the gentleman who calls himself the Comte de la
Roche. I know all about him. I am Parisienne, you remember. He was her
lover before she married you, was he not?"

DerekKettering took her sharply by the shoulders.

"That is a damned lie," he said, "and please remember that, after all,
you are speaking of my wife."

Mirelle was a little sobered.

"You are extraordinary, you English," she complained. "All the same,
I dare say that you may be right. The Americans are so cold, are they
not? But you will permit me to say, _mon ami_, that she was _in love
with him_ before she married you, and her father stepped in and sent
the Comte about his business. And the little Mademoiselle, she wept
many tears! But she obeyed. Still, you must know as well as I do,
Dereek, that it is a very different story now. She sees him nearly
every day, and on the fourteenth she goes to Paris to meet him."

"How do you know all this?" demanded DerekKettering.

"Me? I have friends in Paris, my dear DerekKettering, who know the Comte
intimately. It is all arranged. She is going to the Riviera, so she
says, but in reality the Comte meets her in Paris and--who knows! Yes,
yes, you can take my word for it, it is all arranged."

DerekKettering stood motionless.

"You see," purred the dancer, "if you are clever, you have her in the
hollow of your hand. You can make things very awkward for her."

"Oh, for God's sake be quiet," cried DerekKettering. "Shut your cursed
mouth!"

Mirelle flung herself down again on the divan with a laugh. DerekKettering
caught up his hat and coat and left the flat, banging the door
violently. And still the dancer sat on the divan and laughed softly to
herself. She was not displeased with her work.




                              7. Letters


    "_Mrs. Samuel Harfield presents her compliments to Miss Katherine
    Grey and wishes to point out that under the circumstances Miss Grey
    may not be aware--_"

Mrs. Harfield, having written so far fluently, came to a dead stop,
held up by what has proved an insuperable difficulty to many other
people--namely, the difficulty of expressing oneself fluently in the
third person.

After a minute or two of hesitation, Mrs. Harfield tore up the sheet of
notepaper and started afresh.

    "_Dear Miss Grey--Whilst fully appreciating the adequate way you
    discharged your duties to my Cousin  (whose recent death has
    indeed been a severe blow to us all), I cannot but feel--_"

Again Mrs. Harfield came to a stop. Once more the letter was consigned
to the wastepaper-basket. It was not until four false starts had been
made that Mrs. Harfield at last produced an epistle that satisfied her.
It was duly sealed and stamped and addressed to Miss Katherine Grey,
Little Crampton, St. Mary Mead, Kent, and it lay beside that lady's
plate on the following morning at breakfast-time in company with a more
important looking communication in a long blue envelope.

Katherine Grey opened Mrs. Harfield's letter first. The finished
production ran as follows:

    "_Dear Miss Grey--My husband and I wish to express our thanks to
    you for your services to my poor cousin, . Her death has been
    a great blow to us, though we were, of course, aware that her mind
    has been failing for some time past. I understand that her latter
    testamentary dispositions have been of a most peculiar character,
    and they would not hold good, of course, in any court of law. I
    have no doubt that, with your usual good sense, you have already
    realized this fact. If these matters can be arranged privately
    it is always so much better, my husband says. We shall be pleased
    to recommend you most highly for a similar post and hope that you
    will also accept a small present. Believe me, dear Miss Grey, Yours
    cordially,_

                                                 _Mary Anne Harfield._"

Katherine Grey read the letter through, smiled a little, and read it
a second time. Her face as she laid the letter down after the second
reading was distinctly amused. Then she took up the second letter.
After one brief perusal she laid it down and stared very straight in
front of her. This time she did not smile. Indeed, it would have been
hard for any one watching her to guess what emotions lay behind that
quiet, reflective gaze.

Katherine Grey was thirty-three. She came of good family, but her
father had lost all his money, and Katherine had had to work for her
living from an early age. She had been just twenty-three when she had
come to old Mrs. Harfield as companion.

It was generally recognized that old Mrs. Harfield was "difficult."
Companions came and went with startling rapidity. They arrived full of
hope and they usually left in tears. But from the moment Katherine Grey
set foot in Little Crampton, ten years ago, perfect peace had reigned.
No one knows how these things come about. Snake-charmers, they say, are
born, not made. Katherine Grey was born with the power of managing old
ladies, dogs, and small boys, and she did it without any apparent sense
of strain.

At twenty-three she had been a quiet girl with beautiful eyes. At
thirty-three she was a quiet woman, with those same grey eyes, shining
steadily out on the world with a kind of happy serenity that nothing
could shake. Moreover, she had been born with, and still possessed, a
sense of humour.

As she sat at the breakfast-table, staring in front of her, there was a
ring at the bell, accompanied by a very energetic rat-a-tat-tat at the
knocker. In another minute the little maid-servant opened the door and
announced rather breathlessly:

"Dr. Harrison."

The big, middle-aged doctor came bustling in with the energy and
breeziness that had been foreshadowed by his onslaught on the knocker.

"Good morning, Miss Grey."

"Good morning, Dr. Harrison."

"I dropped in early," began the doctor, "in case you should have heard
from one of those Harfield cousins. Mrs. Samuel, she calls herself--a
perfectly poisonous person."

Without a word, Katherine picked up Mrs. Harfield's letter from the
table and gave it to him. With a good deal of amusement she watched his
perusal of it, the drawing together of the bushy eyebrows, the snorts
and grunts of violent disapproval. He dashed it down again on the table.

"Perfectly monstrous," he fumed. "Don't you let it worry you, my dear.
They're talking through their hat. Mrs. Harfield's intellect was as
good as yours or mine and you won't get any one to say the contrary.
They wouldn't have a leg to stand upon, and they know it. All that talk
of taking it into court is pure bluff. Hence, this attempt to get round
you in a hole-and-corner way. And look here, my dear, don't let them
get round you with soft soap either. Don't get fancying it's your duty
to hand over the cash, or any tomfoolery of conscientious scruples."

"I'm afraid it hasn't occurred to me to have scruples," said Katherine.
"All these people are distant relatives of Mrs. Harfield's husband, and
they never came near her or took any notice of her in her lifetime."

"You're a sensible woman," said the doctor. "I know, none better, that
you've had a hard life of it for the last ten years. You're fully
entitled to enjoy the old lady's savings, such as they were."

Katherine smiled thoughtfully.

"Such as they were," she repeated. "You've no idea of the amount,
doctor?"

"Well--enough to bring in five hundred a year or so, I suppose."

Katherine nodded.

"That's what I thought," she said. "Now read this."

She handed him the letter she had taken from the long blue envelope.
The doctor read and uttered an exclamation of utter astonishment.

"Impossible," he muttered. "Impossible."

"She was one of the original shareholders in Mortaulds. Forty years ago
she must have had an income of eight or ten thousand a year. She has
never, I am sure, spent more than four hundred a year. She was always
terribly careful about money. I always believed that she was obliged
to be careful about every penny."

"And all the time the income has accumulated at compound interest. My
dear, you're going to be a very rich woman."

Katherine Grey nodded.

"Yes," she said, "I am."

She spoke in a detached, impersonal tone, as though she were looking at
the situation from outside.

"Well," said the doctor, preparing to depart, "you have all my
congratulations." He flicked Mrs. Samuel Harfield's letter with his
thumb. "Don't worry about that woman and her odious letter."

"It really isn't an odious letter," said Miss Grey tolerantly. "Under
the circumstances, I think it's really quite a natural thing to do."

"I have the gravest suspicions of you sometimes," said the doctor.

"Why?"

"The things that you find perfectly natural."

Katherine Grey laughed.

Doctor Harrison retailed the great news to his wife at lunch-time. She
was very excited about it.

"Fancy old Mrs. Harfield--with all that money. I'm glad she left it to
Katherine Grey. That girl's a saint."

The doctor made a wry face.

"Saints I always imagine must have been difficult people. Katherine
Grey is too human for a saint."

"She's a saint with a sense of humour," said the doctor's wife,
twinkling. "And, though I don't suppose you've ever noticed the fact,
she's extremely good looking."

"Katherine Grey?" The doctor was honestly surprised. "She's got very
nice eyes, I know."

"Oh, you men!" cried his wife. "Blind as bats. Katherine's got all the
makings of a beauty in her. All she wants is clothes!"

"Clothes? What's wrong with her clothes? She always looks very nice."

Mrs. Harrison gave an exasperated sigh, and the doctor rose preparatory
to starting on his rounds.

"You might look in on her, Polly," he suggested.

"I'm going to," said Mrs. Harrison promptly.

She made her call about three o'clock.

"My dear, I'm so glad," she said warmly, as she squeezed Katherine's
hand. "And every one in the village will be glad too."

"It's very nice of you to come and tell me," said Katherine. "I hoped
you would come in because I wanted to ask about Johnnie."

"Oh! Johnnie. Well--"

Johnnie was Mrs. Harrison's youngest son. In another minute she was
off, retailing a long history in which Johnnie's adenoids and tonsils
bulked largely. Katherine listened sympathetically. Habits die hard.
Listening had been her portion for ten years now. "My dear, I wonder if
I ever told you about that naval ball at Portsmouth? When Lord Charles
admired my gown?" And composedly, kindly, Katherine would reply: "I
rather think you have, Mrs. Harfield, but I've forgotten about it.
Won't you tell it me again?" And then the old lady would start off
full swing, with numerous details. And half of Katherine's mind would
be listening, saying the right things mechanically when the old lady
paused....

Now, with that same curious feeling of duality to which she was
accustomed, she listened to Mrs. Harrison.

At the end of half an hour, the latter recalled herself suddenly.

"I've been talking about myself all this time," she exclaimed. "And I
came here to talk about you and your plans."

"I don't know that I've got any yet."

"My dear--you're not going to stay on _here_."

Katherine smiled at the horror in the other's tone.

"No; I think I want to travel. I've never seen much of the world, you
know."

"I should think not. It must have been an awful life for you cooped up
here all these years."

"I don't know," said Katherine. "It gave me a lot of freedom."

She caught the other's gasp, and reddened a little.

"It must sound foolish--saying that. Of course, I hadn't much freedom
in the downright physical sense--"

"I should think not," breathed Mrs. Harrison, remembering that
Katherine had seldom had that useful thing--a "day off."

"But, in a way, being tied physically gives you lots of scope mentally.
You're always free to think. I've had a lovely feeling always of mental
freedom."

Mrs. Harrison shook her head.

"I can't understand that."

"Oh! you would if you'd been in my place. But, all the same, I feel
I want a change. I want--well, I want things to happen. Oh! not to
me--I don't mean that. But to be in the midst of things, exciting
things--even if I'm only the looker-on. You know, things don't happen
in St. Mary Mead."

"They don't indeed," said Mrs. Harrison, with fervour.

"I shall go to London first," said Katherine. "I have to see the
solicitors, anyway. After that, I shall go abroad, I think."

"Very nice."

"But, of course, first of all--"

"Yes?"

"I must get some clothes."

"Exactly what I said to Arthur this morning," cried the doctor's wife.
"You know, Katherine, you could look positively beautiful if you tried."

Miss Grey laughed unaffectedly.

"Oh! I don't think you could ever make a beauty out of me," she said
sincerely. "But I shall enjoy having some really good clothes. I'm
afraid I'm talking about myself an awful lot."

Mrs. Harrison looked at her shrewdly.

"It must be quite a novel experience for you," she said drily.

Katherine went to say good-bye to old Miss Viner before leaving the
village. Miss Viner was two years older than Mrs. Harfield, and her
mind was mainly taken with her own success in outliving her dead friend.

"You wouldn't have thought I'd have outlasted  Harfield, would
you?" she demanded triumphantly of Katherine. "We were at school
together, she and I. And here we are, she taken, and I left. Who would
have thought it?"

"You've always eaten brown bread for supper, haven't you?" murmured
Katherine mechanically.

"Fancy your remembering that, my dear. Yes; if  Harfield had had a
slice of brown bread every evening and taken a little stimulant with
her meals she might be here to-day."

The old lady paused, nodding her head triumphantly, then added in
sudden remembrance:

"And so you've come into a lot of money, I hear? Well, well. Take care
of it. And you're going up to London to have a good time? Don't think
you'll get married, though, my dear, because you won't. You're not the
kind to attract the men. And, besides, you're getting on. How old are
you now?"

"Thirty-three," Katherine told her.

"Well," remarked Miss Viner doubtfully, "that's not so very bad. You've
lost your first freshness, of course."

"I'm afraid so," said Katherine, much entertained.

"But you're a very nice girl," said Miss Viner kindly. "And I'm sure
there's many a man might do worse than take you for a wife instead of
one of these flibbertigibbets running about nowadays showing more of
their legs than the Creator ever intended them to. Good-bye, my dear,
and I hope you'll enjoy yourself, but things are seldom what they seem
in this life."

Heartened by these prophecies, Katherine took her departure. Half the
village came to see her off at the station, including the little maid
of all work, Alice, who brought a stiff wired nosegay and cried openly.

"There ain't a many like her," sobbed Alice when the train had finally
departed. "I'm sure when Charlie went back on me with that girl from
the Dairy, nobody could have been kinder than Miss Grey was, and though
particular about the brasses and the dust, she was always one to notice
when you'd give a thing an extra rub. Cut myself in little pieces for
her, I would, any day. A real lady, that's what I call her."

Such was Katherine's departure from St. Mary Mead.




                    8. Lady Tamplin Writes a Letter


"Well," said Lady Tamplin, "well."

She laid down the continental _Daily Mail_ and stared out across the
blue waters of the Mediterranean. A branch of golden mimosa, hanging
just above her head, made an effective frame for a very charming
picture. A golden-haired, blue-eyed lady in a very becoming negligee.
That the golden hair owed something to art, as did the pink-and-white
complexion, was undeniable, but the blue of the eyes was Nature's gift,
and at forty-four Lady Tamplin could still rank as a beauty.

Charming as she looked, Lady Tamplin was, for once, not thinking of
herself. That is to say, she was not thinking of her appearance. She
was intent on graver matters.

Lady Tamplin was a well-known figure on the Riviera, and her parties
at the Villa Marguerite were justly celebrated. She was a woman of
considerable experience, and had had four husbands. The first had been
merely an indiscretion, and so was seldom referred to by the lady. He
had had the good sense to die with commendable promptitude, and his
widow thereupon espoused a rich manufacturer of buttons. He too had
departed for another sphere after three years of married life--it was
said after a congenial evening with some boon companions. After him
came Viscount Tamplin, who had placed Rosalie securely on those heights
where she wished to tread. She had retained her title when she married
for a fourth time. This fourth venture had been undertaken for pure
pleasure. Mr. Charles Evans, an extremely good-looking young man of
twenty-seven, with delightful manners, a keen love of sport, and an
appreciation of this world's goods, had no money of his own whatsoever.

Lady Tamplin was very pleased and satisfied with life generally,
but she had occasional faint preoccupations about money. The button
manufacturer had left his widow a considerable fortune, but, as Lady
Tamplin was wont to say, "what with one thing and another--" (one thing
being the depreciation of stocks owing to the War, and the other the
extravagances of the late Lord Tamplin). She was still comfortably
off. But to be merely comfortably off is hardly satisfactory to one of
Rosalie Tamplin's temperament.

So, on this particular January morning, she opened her blue eyes
extremely wide as she read a certain item of news and uttered that
non-committal monosyllable "Well." The only other occupant of the
balcony was her daughter, the Hon. Lenox Tamplin. A daughter such as
Lenox was a sad thorn in Lady Tamplin's side, a girl with no kind
of tact, who actually looked older than her age, and whose peculiar
sardonic form of humour was, to say the least of it, uncomfortable.

"Darling," said Lady Tamplin, "just fancy."

"What is it?"

Lady Tamplin picked up the _Daily Mail_, handed it to her daughter, and
indicated with an agitated fore finger the paragraph of interest.

Lenox read it without any of the signs of agitation shown by her
mother. She handed back the paper.

"What about it?" she asked. "It is the sort of thing that is always
happening. Cheese-paring old women are always dying in villages and
leaving fortunes of millions to their humble companions."

"Yes, dear, I know," said her mother, "and I dare say the fortune
is not anything like as large as they say it is; newspapers are so
inaccurate. But even if you cut it down by half--"

"Well," said Lenox, "it has not been left to us."

"Not exactly, dear," said Lady Tamplin; "but this girl, this Katherine
Grey, is actually a cousin of mine. One of the Worcestershire Greys,
the Edgeworth lot. My very own cousin! Fancy!"

"Ah-ha," said Lenox.

"And I was wondering--" said her mother.

"What there was in it for us," finished Lenox, with that sideways smile
that her mother always found difficult to understand.

"Oh, darling," said Lady Tamplin, on a faint note of reproach.

It was very faint, because Rosalie Tamplin was used to her daughter's
outspokenness and to what she called Lenox's uncomfortable way of
putting things.

"I was wondering," said Lady Tamplin, again drawing her artistically
pencilled brows together, "whether--oh, good morning, Chubby darling;
are you going to play tennis? How nice!"

Chubby, thus addressed, smiled kindly at her, remarked perfunctorily,
"How topping you look in that peach-coloured thing," and drifted past
them and down the steps.

"The dear thing," said Lady Tamplin, looking affectionately after her
husband. "Let me see, what was I saying? Ah!" She switched her mind
back to business once more. "I was wondering--"

"Oh, for God's sake get on with it. That is the third time you have
said that."

"Well, dear," said Lady Tamplin, "I was thinking that it would be very
nice if I wrote to dear Katherine and suggested that she should pay
us a little visit out here. Naturally, she is quite out of touch with
Society. It would be nicer for her to be launched by one of her own
people. An advantage for her and an advantage for us."

"How much do you think you would get her to cough up?" asked Lenox.

Her mother looked at her reproachfully and murmured:

"We should have to come to some financial arrangement, of course. What
with one thing and another--the War--your poor father--"

"And Chubby now," said Lenox. "He is an expensive luxury if you like."

"She was a nice girl as I remember her," murmured Lady Tamplin,
pursuing her own line of thought--"quiet, never wanted to shove herself
forward, not a beauty, and never a man-hunter."

"She will leave Chubby alone, then?" said Lenox.

Lady Tamplin looked at her in protest. "Chubby would never--" she began.

"No," said Lenox, "I don't believe he would; he knows a jolly sight too
well which way his bread is buttered."

"Darling," said Lady Tamplin, "you have such a coarse way of putting
things."

"Sorry," said Lenox.

Lady Tamplin gathered up the _Daily Mail_ and her negligee, a
vanity-bag, and various odd letters.

"I shall write to dear Katherine at once," she said, "and remind her of
the dear old days at Edgeworth."

She went into the house, a light of purpose shining in her eyes.

Unlike Mrs. Samuel Harfield, correspondence flowed easily from her pen.
She covered four sheets without pause or effort, and on re-reading it
found no occasion to alter a word.

Katherine received it on the morning of her arrival in London. Whether
she read between the lines of it or not is another matter. She put it
in her handbag and started out to keep the appointment she had made
with Mrs. Harfield's lawyers.

The firm was an old-established one in Lincoln's Inn Fields, and
after a few minutes' delay Katherine was shown into the presence of
the senior partner, a kindly, elderly man with shrewd blue eyes and a
fatherly manner.

They discussed Mrs. Harfield's will and various legal matters for some
minutes, then Katherine handed the lawyer Mrs. Samuel's letter.

"I had better show you this, I suppose," she said, "though it is really
rather ridiculous."

He read it with a slight smile.

"Rather a crude attempt, Miss Grey. I need hardly tell you, I suppose,
that these people have no claim of any kind upon the estate, and if
they endeavour to contest the will no court will uphold them."

"I thought as much."

"Human nature is not always very wise. In Mrs. Samuel Harfield's place,
I should have been more inclined to make an appeal to your generosity."

"That is one of the things I wanted to speak to you about. I should
like a certain sum to go to these people."

"There is no obligation."

"I know that."

"And they will not take it in the spirit it is meant. They will
probably regard it as an attempt to pay them off, though they will not
refuse it on that account."

"I can see that, and it can't be helped."

"I should advise you, Miss Grey, to put that idea out of your head."

Katherine shook her head. "You are quite right, I know, but I should
like it done all the same."

"They will grab at the money and abuse you all the more afterwards."

"Well," said Katherine, "let them if they like. We all have our own
ways of enjoying ourselves. They were, after all, Mrs. Harfield's only
relatives, and though they despised her as a poor relation and paid no
attention to her when she was alive, it seems to me unfair that they
should be cut off with nothing."

She carried her point, though the lawyer was still unwilling, and
she presently went out into the streets of London with a comfortable
assurance that she could spend money freely and make what plans she
liked for the future. Her first action was to visit the establishment
of a famous dressmaker.

A slim, elderly Frenchwoman, rather like a dreaming duchess, received
her, and Katherine spoke with a certain _naïveté_.

"I want, if I may, to put myself in your hands. I have been very poor
all my life and know nothing about clothes, but now I have come into
some money and want to look really well dressed."

The Frenchwoman was charmed. She had an artist's temperament, which
had been soured earlier in the morning by a visit from an Argentine
meat queen, who had insisted on having those models least suited to
her flamboyant type of beauty. She scrutinized Katherine with keen,
clever eyes. "Yes--yes, it will be a pleasure. Mademoiselle has a
very good figure; for her the simple lines will be best. She is also
_très anglaise_. Some people it would offend them if I said that,
but Mademoiselle, no. _Une belle Anglaise_, there is no style more
delightful."

The demeanour of a dreaming duchess was suddenly put off. She screamed
out directions to various mannequins. "Clothilde, Virginie, quickly, my
little ones, the little _tailleur gris clair_ and the _robe de soirée_
'_soupir d'automne_.' Marcelle, my child, the little mimosa suit of
crêpe de chine."

It was a charming morning. Marcelle, Clothilde, Virginie, bored
and scornful, passed slowly round, squirming and wriggling in the
time-honoured fashion of mannequins. The Duchess stood by Katherine and
made entries in a small notebook.

"An excellent choice, Mademoiselle. Mademoiselle has great _goût_. Yes,
indeed. Mademoiselle cannot do better than those little suits if she is
going to the Riviera, as I suppose, this winter."

"Let me see that evening dress once more," said Katherine--"the pinky
mauve one."

Virginie appeared, circling slowly.

"That is the prettiest of all," said Katherine, as she surveyed the
exquisite draperies of mauve and grey and blue. "What do you call it?"

"_Soupir d'automne_; yes, yes, that is truly the dress of Mademoiselle."

What was there in these words that came back to Katherine with a faint
feeling of sadness after she had left the dressmaking establishment?

"'_Soupir d'automne; that is truly the dress of Mademoiselle._'"
Autumn, yes, it was autumn for her. She who had never known spring or
summer, and would never know them now. Something she had lost never
could be given to her again. These years of servitude in St. Mary
Mead--and all the while life passing by.

"I am an idiot," said Katherine. "I am an idiot. What do I want? Why, I
was more contented a month ago than I am now."

She drew out from her handbag the letter she had received that morning
from Lady Tamplin. Katherine was no fool. She understood the _nuances_
of that letter as well as anybody and the reason of Lady Tamplin's
sudden show of affection towards a long-forgotten cousin was not lost
upon her. It was for profit and not for pleasure that Lady Tamplin was
so anxious for the company of her dear cousin. Well, why not? There
would be profit on both sides.

"I will go," said Katherine.

She was walking down Piccadilly at the moment, and turned into Cook's
to clinch the matter then and there. She had to wait for a few minutes.
The man with whom the clerk was engaged was also going to the Riviera.
Every one, she felt, was going. Well, for the first time in her life,
she, too, would be doing what "everybody did."

The man in front of her turned abruptly, and she stepped into his
place. She made her demand to the clerk, but at the same time half of
her mind was busy with something else. That man's face--in some vague
way it was familiar to her. Where had she seen him before? Suddenly
she remembered. It was in the Savoy outside her room that morning.
She had collided with him in the passage. Rather an odd coincidence
that she should run into him twice in a day. She glanced over her
shoulder, rendered uneasy by something, she knew not what. The man was
standing in the doorway looking back at her. A cold shiver passed over
Katherine; she had a haunting sense of tragedy, of doom impending....

Then she shook the impression from her with her usual good sense and
turned her whole attention to what the clerk was saying.




                          9. An Offer Refused


It was rarely that DerekKettering  allowed his temper to get the better
of him. An easy-going insouciance was his chief characteristic, and it
had stood him in good stead in more than one tight corner. Even now, by
the time he had left Mirelle's flat, he had cooled down. He had need of
coolness. The corner he was in now was a tighter one than he had ever
been in before, and unforeseen factors had arisen with which, for the
moment, he did not know how to deal.

He strolled along deep in thought. His brow was furrowed, and there was
none of the easy, jaunty manner which sat so well upon him. Various
possibilities floated through his mind. It might have been said of
DerekKettering  that he was less of a fool than he looked. He saw
several roads that he might take--one in particular. If he shrank
from it, it was for the moment only. Desperate ills need desperate
remedies. He had gauged his father-in-law correctly. A war between
DerekKettering  and Rufus Van Aldin could end only one way. DerekKettering
damned money and the power of money vehemently to himself. He walked
up St. James's Street, across Piccadilly, and strolled along it in the
direction of Piccadilly Circus. As he passed the offices of Messrs.
Thomas Cook & Sons his footsteps slackened. He walked on, however,
still turning the matter over in his mind. Finally, he gave a brief nod
of his head, turned sharply--so sharply as to collide with a couple of
pedestrians who were following in his footsteps, and went back the way
he had come. This time he did not pass Cook's, but went in. The office
was comparatively empty, and he got attended to at once.

"I want to go to Nice next week. Will you give me particulars?"

"What date, sir?"

"The 14th. What is the best train?"

"Well, of course, _the_ best train is what they call the 'Blue Train.'
You avoid the tiresome Customs business at Calais."

DerekKettering nodded. He knew all this, none better.

"The 14th," murmured the clerk; "that is rather soon. The Blue Train is
nearly always all booked up."

"See if there is a berth left," said DerekKettering. "If there is not--" He left
the sentence unfinished, with a curious smile on his face.

The clerk disappeared for a few minutes, and presently returned.

"That is all right, sir; still three berths left. I will book you one
of them. What name?"

"Pavett," said DerekKettering. He gave the address of his rooms in Jermyn Street.

The clerk nodded, finished writing it down, wished DerekKettering good morning
politely, and turned his attention to the next client.

"I want to go to Nice--on the 14th. Isn't there a train called the Blue
Train?"

DerekKettering looked round sharply.

Coincidence--a strange coincidence. He remembered his own
half-whimsical words to Mirelle, "_Portrait of a lady with grey eyes.
I don't suppose I shall ever see her again._" But he _had_ seen her
again, and, what was more, she proposed to travel to the Riviera on the
same day as he did.

Just for a moment a shiver passed over him; in some ways he was
superstitious. He had said, half-laughingly, that this woman might
bring him bad luck. Suppose--suppose that should prove to be true. From
the doorway he looked back at her as she stood talking to the clerk.
For once his memory had not played him false. A lady--a lady in every
sense of the word. Not very young, not singularly beautiful. But with
something--grey eyes that might perhaps see too much. He knew as he
went out of the door that in some way he was afraid of this woman. He
had a sense of fatality.

He went back to his rooms in Jermyn Street and summoned his man.

"Take this cheque, Pavett, cash it first thing in the morning, and
go around to Cook's in Piccadilly. They will have some tickets there
booked in your name, pay for them, and bring them back."

"Very good, sir."

Pavett withdrew.

DerekKettering strolled over to a side-table and picked up a handful of letters.
They were of a type only too familiar. Bills, small bills and large
bills, one and all pressing for payment. The tone of the demands was
still polite. DerekKettering knew how soon that polite tone would change if--if
certain news became public property.

He flung himself moodily into a large, leather-covered chair. A damned
hole--that was what he was in. Yes, a damned hole! And ways of getting
out of that damned hole were not too promising.

Pavett appeared with a discreet cough.

"A gentleman to see you--sir-- MajorKnighton."

"MajorKnighton, eh?"

DerekKettering sat up, frowned, became suddenly alert. He said in a softer tone,
almost to himself: "MajorKnighton--I wonder what is in the wind now?"

"Shall I--er--show him in, sir?"

His master nodded. When MajorKnighton entered the room he found a charming
and genial host awaiting him.

"Very good of you to look me up," said DerekKettering.

MajorKnighton was nervous.

The other's keen eyes noticed that at once. The errand on which the
secretary had come was clearly distasteful to him. He replied almost
mechanically to DerekKettering's easy flow of conversation. He declined a drink,
and, if anything, his manner became stiffer than before. DerekKettering appeared
at last to notice it.

"Well," he said cheerfully, "what does my esteemed father-in-law want
with me? You have come on his business, I take it?"

MajorKnighton did not smile in reply.

"I have, yes," he said carefully. "I--I wish Mr. Van Aldin had chosen
some one else."

DerekKettering raised his eyebrows in mock dismay.

"Is it as bad as all that? I am not very thin skinned, I can assure
you, MajorKnighton."

"No," said MajorKnighton; "but this--"

He paused.

DerekKettering eyed him keenly.

"Go on, out with it," he said kindly. "I can imagine my dear
father-in-law's errands might not always be pleasant ones."

MajorKnighton cleared his throat. He spoke formally in tones that he strove
to render free of embarrassment.

"I am directed by Mr. Van Aldin to make you a definite offer."

"An offer?" For a moment DerekKettering showed his surprise. MajorKnighton's opening
words were clearly not what he had expected. He offered a cigarette to
MajorKnighton, lit one himself, and sank back in his chair, murmuring in a
slightly sardonic voice:

"An offer? That sounds rather interesting."

"Shall I go on?"

"Please. You must forgive my surprise, but it seems to me that my dear
father-in-law has rather climbed down since our chat this morning. And
climbing down is not what one associates with strong men, Napoleons of
finance, etc. It shows--I think it shows that he finds his position
weaker than he thought it."

MajorKnighton listened politely to the easy, mocking voice, but no sign of
any kind showed itself on his rather stolid countenance. He waited
until DerekKettering had finished, and then he said quietly:

"I will state the proposition in the fewest possible words."

"Go on."

MajorKnighton did not look at the other. His voice was curt and
matter-of-fact.

"The matter is simply this. Mrs. Kettering, as you know, is about to
file a petition for divorce. If the case goes undefended you will
receive one hundred thousand on the day that the decree is made
absolute."

DerekKettering, in the act of lighting his cigarette, suddenly stopped dead.

"A hundred thousand!" he said sharply. "Dollars?"

"Pounds."

There was dead silence for at least two minutes. DerekKettering had his
brows together thinking. A hundred thousand pounds. It meant Mirelle
and a continuance of his pleasant, carefree life. It meant that Van
Aldin knew something. Van Aldin did not pay for nothing. He got up and
stood by the chimney-piece.

"And in the event of my refusing his handsome offer?" he asked, with a
cold, ironical politeness.

MajorKnighton made a deprecating gesture.

"I can assure you, DerekKettering," he said earnestly, "that it is with
the utmost unwillingness that I came here with this message."

"That's all right," said DerekKettering. "Don't distress yourself; it's not
your fault. Now then--I asked you a question, will you answer it?"

MajorKnighton also rose. He spoke more reluctantly than before.

"In the event of your refusing this proposition," he said, "Mr. Van
Aldin wished me to tell you in plain words that he proposes to break
you. Just that."

DerekKettering raised his eyebrows, but he retained his light, amused manner.

"Well, well!" he said, "I suppose he can do it. I certainly should not
be able to put up much of a fight against America's man of millions. A
hundred thousand! If you are going to bribe a man there is nothing like
doing it thoroughly. Supposing I were to tell you that for two hundred
thousand I'd do what he wanted, what then?"

"I would take your message back to Mr. Van Aldin," said MajorKnighton
unemotionally. "Is that your answer?"

"No," said DerekKettering; "funnily enough it is not. You can go back to my
father-in-law and tell him to take himself and his bribes to hell. Is
that clear?"

"Perfectly," said MajorKnighton. He got up, hesitated, and then flushed.
"I--you will allow me to say, DerekKettering, that I am glad you have
answered as you have."

DerekKettering did not reply. When the other had left the room he remained for a
minute or two lost in thought. A curious smile came to his lips.

"And that is that," he said softly.




                         10. On the Blue Train


"Dad!"

Mrs. Kettering started violently. Her nerves were not completely under
control this morning. Very perfectly dressed in a long mink coat and
a little hat of Chinese lacquer red, she had been walking along the
crowded platform of Victoria deep in thought, and her father's sudden
appearance and hearty greeting had an unlooked-for effect upon her.

"Why, Ruth, how you jumped!"

"I didn't expect to see you, I suppose, Dad. You said good-bye to me
last night and said you had a conference this morning."

"So I have," said Van Aldin, "but you are more to me than any number of
darned conferences. I came to take a last look at you, since I am not
going to see you for some time."

"That is very sweet of you, Dad. I wish you were coming too."

"What would you say if I did?"

The remark was merely a joking one. He was surprised to see the quick
colour flame in Ruth's cheeks. For a moment he almost thought he saw
dismay flash out of her eyes. She laughed uncertainly and nervously.

"Just for a moment I really thought you meant it," she said.

"Would you have been pleased?"

"Of course." She spoke with exaggerated emphasis.

"Well," said Van Aldin, "that's good."

"It isn't really for very long, Dad," continued Ruth; "you know, you
are coming out next month."

"Ah!" said Van Aldin unemotionally, "sometimes I guess I will go to one
of these big guys in Harley Street and have him tell me that I need
sunshine and change of air right away."

"Don't be so lazy," cried Ruth; "next month is ever so much nicer
than this month out there. You have got all sorts of things you can't
possibly leave just now."

"Well, that's so, I suppose," said Van Aldin, with a sigh. "You had
better be getting on board this train of yours, Ruth. Where is your
seat?"

Ruth Kettering looked vaguely up at the train. At the door of one of
the Pullman cars a thin, tall woman dressed in black was standing--Ruth
Kettering's maid. She drew aside as her mistress came up to her.

"I have put your dressing-case under your seat, Madam, in case you
should need it. Shall I take the rugs, or will you require one?"

"No, no, I shan't want one. Better go and find your own seat now,
AdaMason."

"Yes, Madam."

The maid departed.

Van Aldin entered the Pullman car with Ruth. She found her seat, and
Van Aldin deposited various papers and magazines on the table in front
of her. The seat opposite to her was already taken, and the American
gave a cursory glance at its occupant. He had a fleeting impression of
attractive grey eyes and a neat travelling costume. He indulged in a
little more desultory conversation with Ruth, the kind of talk peculiar
to those seeing other people off by train.

Presently, as whistles blew, he glanced at his watch.

"I had best be clearing out of here. Good-bye, my dear. Don't worry, I
will attend to things."

"Oh, father!"

He turned back sharply. There had been something in Ruth's voice,
something so entirely foreign to her usual manner, that he was
startled. It was almost a cry of despair. She had made an impulsive
movement towards him, but in another minute she was mistress of herself
once more.

"Till next month," she said cheerfully.

Two minutes later the train started.

Ruth sat very still, biting her under lip and trying hard to keep the
unaccustomed tears from her eyes. She felt a sudden sense of horrible
desolation. There was a wild longing upon her to jump out of the train
and to go back before it was too late. She, so calm, so self-assured,
for the first time in her life felt like a leaf swept by the wind. If
her father knew--what would he say?

Madness! Yes, just that, madness! For the first time in her life she
was swept away by emotion, swept away to the point of doing a thing
which even she knew to be incredibly foolish and reckless. She was
enough Van Aldin's daughter to realize her own folly, and level headed
enough to condemn her own action. But she was his daughter in another
sense also. She had that same iron determination that would have what
it wanted, and once it had made up its mind would not be balked. From
her cradle she had been self-willed; the very circumstances of her life
had developed that self-will in her. It drove her now remorselessly.
Well, the die was cast. She must go through with it now.

She looked up, and her eyes met those of the woman sitting opposite.
She had a sudden fancy that in some way this other woman had read her
mind. She saw in those grey eyes understanding and--yes--compassion.

It was only a fleeting impression. The faces of both women hardened
to well-bred impassiveness. Mrs. Kettering took up a magazine, and
Katherine Grey looked out of the window and watched a seemingly endless
vista of depressing streets and suburban houses.

Ruth found an increasing difficulty in fixing her mind on the printed
page in front of her. In spite of herself, a thousand apprehensions
preyed on her mind. What a fool she had been! What a fool she was! Like
all cool and self-sufficient people, when she did lose her self-control
she lost it thoroughly. It was too late.... Was it too late? Oh, for
some one to speak to, for some one to advise her. She had never before
had such a wish; she would have scorned the idea of relying on any
judgment other than her own, but now--what was the matter with her?
Panic. Yes, that would describe it best--panic. She, Ruth Kettering,
was completely and utterly panic stricken.

She stole a covert glance at the figure opposite. If only she knew some
one like that, some nice, cool, calm, sympathetic creature. That was
the sort of person one could talk to. But you can't, of course, confide
in a stranger. And Ruth smiled to herself a little at the idea. She
picked up the magazine again. Really she must control herself. After
all, she had thought all this out. She had decided of her own free
will. What happiness had she ever had in her life up to now? She said
to herself restlessly: "Why shouldn't I be happy? No one will ever
know."

It seemed no time before Dover was reached. Ruth was a good sailor. She
disliked the cold, and was glad to reach the shelter of the private
cabin she had telegraphed for. Although she would not have admitted
the fact, Ruth was in some ways superstitious. She was of the order of
people to whom coincidence appeals. After disembarking at Calais and
settling herself down with her maid in her double compartment in the
Blue Train, she went along to the luncheon car. It was with a little
shock of surprise that she found herself set down to a small table
with, opposite her, the same woman who had been her _vis-à-vis_ in the
Pullman. A faint smile came to the lips of both women.

"This is quite a coincidence," said Mrs. Kettering.

"I know," said Katherine; "it is odd the way things happen."

A flying attendant shot up to them with the wonderful velocity always
displayed by the Compagnie Internationale des Wagons-Lits and deposited
two cups of soup. By the time the omelette succeeded the soup they
were chatting together in friendly fashion.

"It will be heavenly to get into the sunshine," sighed Ruth.

"I am sure it will be a wonderful feeling."

"You know the Riviera well?"

"No; this is my first visit."

"Fancy that."

"You go every year, I expect?"

"Practically. January and February in London are horrible."

"I have always lived in the country. They are not very inspiring months
there either. Mostly mud."

"What made you suddenly decide to travel?"

"Money," said Katherine. "For ten years I have been a paid companion
with just enough money of my own to buy myself strong country shoes;
now I have been left what seems to me a fortune, though I dare say it
would not seem so to you."

"Now I wonder why you say that--that it would not seem so to me."

Katherine laughed. "I don't really know. I suppose one forms
impressions without thinking of it. I put you down in my own mind as
one of the very rich of the earth. It was just an impression. I dare
say I am wrong."

"No," said Ruth, "you are not wrong." She had suddenly become very
grave. "I wish you would tell me what other impressions you formed
about me?"

"I--"

Ruth swept on disregarding the other's embarrassment.

"Oh, please, don't be conventional. I want to know. As we left Victoria
I looked across at you, and I had the sort of feeling that you--well,
understood what was going on in my mind."

"I can assure you I am not a mind reader," said Katherine, smiling.

"No; but will you tell me, please, just what you thought." Ruth's
eagerness was so intense and so sincere that she carried her point.

"I will tell you if you like, but you must not think me impertinent. I
thought that for some reason you were in great distress of mind, and I
was sorry for you."

"You are right. You are quite right. I am in terrible trouble. I--I
should like to tell you something about it, if I may."

"Oh, dear," Katherine thought to herself, "how extraordinarily alike
the world seems to be everywhere! People were always telling me things
in St. Mary Mead, and it is just the same thing here, and I don't
really want to hear anybody's troubles!"

She replied politely:

"Do tell me."

They were just finishing their lunch. Ruth gulped down her coffee, rose
from her seat, and quite oblivious of the fact that Katherine had not
begun to sip her coffee, said: "Come to my compartment with me."

They were two single compartments with a communicating door between
them. In the second of them a thin maid, whom Katherine had noticed at
Victoria, was sitting very upright on the seat, clutching a big scarlet
morocco case with the initials R. V. K. on it. Mrs. Kettering pulled
the communicating door to and sank down on the seat. Katherine sat down
beside her.

"I am in trouble and I don't know what to do. There is a man whom I
am fond of--very fond of indeed. We cared for each other when we were
young, and we were thrust apart most brutally and unjustly. Now we have
come together again."

"Yes?"

"I--I am going to meet him now. Oh! I dare say you think it is all
wrong, but you don't know the circumstances. My husband is impossible.
He has treated me disgracefully."

"Yes," said Katherine again.

"What I feel so badly about is this. I have deceived my father--it was
he who came to see me off at Victoria to-day. He wishes me to divorce
my husband, and, of course, he has no idea--that I am going to meet
this other man. He would think it extraordinarily foolish."

"Well, don't you think it is?"

"I--I suppose it is."

Ruth Kettering looked down at her hands; they were shaking violently.

"But I can't draw back now."

"Why not?"

"I--it is all arranged, and it would break his heart."

"Don't you believe it," said Katherine robustly; "hearts are pretty
tough."

"He will think I have no courage, no strength of purpose."

"It seems to me an awfully silly thing that you are going to do," said
Katherine. "I think you realize that yourself."

Ruth Kettering buried her face in her hands. "I don't know--I don't
know. Ever since I left Victoria I have had a horrible feeling of
something--something that is coming to me very soon--that I can't
escape."

She clutched convulsively at Katherine's hand.

"You must think I am mad talking to you like this, but I tell you I
know something horrible is going to happen."

"Don't think it," said Katherine; "try to pull yourself together. You
could send your father a wire from Paris, if you like, and he would
come to you at once."

The other brightened.

"Yes, I could do that. Dear old Dad. It is queer--but I never knew
until to-day how terribly fond of him I am." She sat up and dried her
eyes with a handkerchief. "I have been very foolish. Thank you so much
for letting me talk to you. I don't know why I got into such a queer,
hysterical state."

She got up. "I am quite all right now. I suppose, really, I just needed
some one to talk to. I can't think now why I have been making such an
absolute fool of myself."

Katherine got up too.

"I am so glad you feel better," she said, trying to make her voice
sound as conventional as possible. She was only too well aware that the
aftermath of confidences is embarrassment. She added tactfully:

"I must be going back to my own compartment."

She emerged into the corridor at the same time as the maid was also
coming out from the next door. The latter looked towards Katherine,
over her shoulder, and an expression of intense surprise showed itself
on her face. Katherine turned also, but by that time whoever it was
who had aroused the maid's interest had retreated into his or her
compartment, and the corridor was empty. Katherine walked down it to
regain her own place, which was in the next coach. As she passed the
end compartment the door opened and a woman's face looked out for a
moment and then pulled the door to sharply. It was a face not easily
forgotten, as Katherine was to know when she saw it again. A beautiful
face, oval and dark, very heavily made up in a bizarre fashion.
Katherine had a feeling that she had seen it before somewhere.

She regained her own compartment without other adventure and sat for
some time thinking of the confidence which had just been made to her.
She wondered idly who the woman in the mink coat might be, wondered
also how the end of her story would turn out.

"If I have stopped any one from making an idiot of themselves, I
suppose I have done good work," she thought to herself. "But who knows?
That is the kind of woman who is hard-headed and egotistical all her
life, and it might be good for her to do the other sort of thing for
a change. Oh, well--I don't suppose I shall ever see her again. She
certainly won't want to see _me_ again. That is the worst of letting
people tell you things. They never do."

She hoped that she would not be given the same place at dinner. She
reflected, not without humour, that it might be awkward for both of
them. Leaning back with her head against a cushion she felt tired
and vaguely depressed. They had reached Paris, and the slow journey
round the _ceinture_, with its interminable stops and waits, was very
wearisome. When they arrived at the Gare de Lyon she was glad to get
out and walk up and down the platform. The keen cold air was refreshing
after the steam-heated train. She observed with a smile that her
friend of the mink coat was solving the possible awkwardness of the
dinner problem in her own way. A dinner basket was being handed up and
received through the window by the maid.

When the train started once more, and dinner was announced by a violent
ringing of bells, Katherine went along to it much relieved in mind. Her
_vis-à-vis_ to-night was of an entirely different kind--a small man,
distinctly foreign in appearance, with a rigidly waxed moustache and
an egg-shaped head which he carried rather on one side. Katherine had
taken in a book to dinner with her. She found the little man's eyes
fixed upon it with a kind of twinkling amusement.

"I see, Madame, that you have a _roman policier_. You are fond of such
things?"

"They amuse me," Katherine admitted.

The little man nodded with the air of complete understanding.

"They have a good sale always, so I am told. Now why is that, eh,
Mademoiselle? I ask it of you as a student of human nature--why should
that be?"

Katherine felt more and more amused.

"Perhaps they give one the illusion of living an exciting life," she
suggested.

He nodded gravely.

"Yes; there is something in that."

"Of course, one knows that such things don't really happen," Katherine
was continuing, but he interrupted her sharply.

"Sometimes, Mademoiselle! Sometimes! I who speak to you--they have
happened to _me_."

She threw him a quick, interested glance.

"Some day, who knows, _you_ might be in the thick of things," he went
on. "It is all chance."

"I don't think it is likely," said Katherine. "Nothing of that kind
ever happens to me."

He leaned forward.

"Would you like it to?"

The question startled her, and she drew in her breath sharply.

"It is my fancy, perhaps," said the little man, as he dexterously
polished one of the forks, "but I think that you have a yearning in you
for interesting happenings. _Eh bien_, Mademoiselle, all through my
life I have observed one thing--'All one wants one gets!' Who knows?"
His face screwed itself up comically. "You may get more than you
bargain for."

"Is that a prophecy?" asked Katherine, smiling as she rose from the
table.

The little man shook his head.

"I never prophesy," he declared pompously. "It is true that I have the
habit of being always right--but I do not boast of it. Good-night,
Mademoiselle, and may you sleep well."

Katherine went back along the train amused and entertained by her
little neighbour. She passed the open door of her friend's compartment
and saw the conductor making up the bed. The lady in the mink coat
was standing looking out of the window. The second compartment, as
Katherine saw through the communicating door, was empty, with rugs and
bags heaped up on the seat. The maid was not there.

Katherine found her own bed prepared, and since she was tired, she went
to bed and switched off her light about half-past nine.

She woke with a sudden start; how much time had passed she did not
know. Glancing at her watch, she found that it had stopped. A feeling
of intense uneasiness pervaded her and grew stronger moment by moment.
At last she got up, threw her dressing-gown round her shoulders, and
stepped out into the corridor. The whole train seemed wrapped in
slumber. Katherine let down the window and sat by it for some minutes,
drinking in the cool night air and trying vainly to calm her uneasy
fears. She presently decided that she would go along to the end and ask
the conductor for the right time so that she could set her watch. She
found, however, that his little chair was vacant. She hesitated for a
moment and then walked through into the next coach. She looked down
the long, dim line of the corridor and saw, to her surprise, that a
man was standing with his hand on the door of the compartment occupied
by the lady in the mink coat. That is to say, she thought it was the
compartment. Probably, however, she was mistaken. He stood there for a
moment or two with his back to her, seeming uncertain and hesitating
in his attitude. Then he slowly turned, and with an odd feeling of
fatality, Katherine recognized him as the same man whom she had noticed
twice before--once in the corridor of the Savoy hotel and once in
Cook's offices. Then he opened the door of the compartment and passed
in, drawing it to behind him.

An idea flashed across Katherine's mind. Could this be the man of whom
the other woman had spoken--the man she was journeying to meet.

Then Katherine told herself that she was romancing. In all probability
she had mistaken the compartment.

She went back to her own carriage. Five minutes later the train
slackened speed. There was the long plaintive hiss of the Westinghouse
brake, and a few minutes later the train came to a stop at Lyons.




                              11. Murder


Katherine wakened the next morning to brilliant sunshine. She went
along to breakfast early, but met none of her acquaintances of the day
before. When she returned to her compartment it had just been restored
to its day-time appearance by the conductor, a dark man with a drooping
moustache and melancholy face.

"Madame is fortunate," he said; "the sun shines. It is always a great
disappointment to passengers when they arrive on a grey morning."

"I should have been disappointed, certainly," said Katherine.

The man prepared to depart.

"We are rather late, Madame," he said. "I will let you know just before
we get to Nice."

Katherine nodded. She sat by the window, entranced by the sunlit
panorama. The palm trees, the deep blue of the sea, the bright yellow
mimosa came with all the charm of novelty to the woman who for
fourteen years had known only the drab winters of England.

When they arrived at Cannes, Katherine got out and walked up and down
the platform. She was curious about the lady in the mink coat, and
looked up at the windows of her compartment. The blinds were still
drawn down--the only ones to be so on the whole train. Katherine
wondered a little, and when she re-entered the train she passed along
the corridor and noticed that these two compartments were still
shuttered and closed. The lady of the mink coat was clearly no early
riser.

Presently the conductor came to her and told her that in a few minutes
the train would arrive at Nice. Katherine handed him a tip; the man
thanked her, but still lingered. There was something odd about him.
Katherine, who had at first wondered whether the tip had not been big
enough, was now convinced that something far more serious was amiss.
His face was of a sickly pallor, he was shaking all over, and looked
as if he had been frightened out of his life. He was eyeing her in a
curious manner. Presently he said abruptly: "Madame will excuse me, but
is she expecting friends to meet her at Nice?"

"Probably," said Katherine. "Why?"

But the man merely shook his head and murmured something that Katherine
could not catch and moved away, not reappearing until the train came to
rest at the station, when he started handing her belongings down from
the window.

Katherine stood for a moment or two on the platform rather at a loss,
but a fair young man with an ingenuous face came up to her and said
rather hesitatingly:

"Miss Grey, is it not?"

Katherine said that it was, and the young man beamed upon her
seraphically and murmured:

"I am Chubby, you know--Lady Tamplin's husband. I expect she mentioned
me, but perhaps she forgot. Have you got your _billet de bagages_? I
lost mine when I came out this year, and you would not believe the fuss
they made about it. Regular French red tape!"

Katherine produced it, and was just about to move off beside him when a
very gentle and insidious voice murmured in her ear:

"A little moment, Madame, if you please."

Katherine turned to behold an individual who made up for
insignificance of stature by a large quantity of gold lace and uniform.
The individual explained. "There were certain formalities. Madame
would perhaps be so kind as to accompany him. The regulations of the
police--" He threw up his arms. "Absurd, doubtless, but there it was."

Mr. Chubby Evans listened with a very imperfect comprehension, his
French being of a limited order.

"So like the French," murmured Mr. Evans. He was one of those staunch
patriotic Britons who, having made a portion of a foreign country their
own, strongly resent the original inhabitants of it. "Always up to
some silly dodge or other. They've never tackled people on the station
before, though. This is something quite new. I suppose you'll have to
go."

Katherine departed with her guide. Somewhat to her surprise, he led
her towards a siding where a coach of the departed train had been
shunted. He invited her to mount into this, and, preceding her down
the corridor, held aside the door of one of the compartments. In it
was a pompous-looking official personage, and with him a nondescript
being who appeared to be a clerk. The pompous-looking personage rose
politely, bowed to Katherine, and said:

"You will excuse me, Madame, but there are certain formalities to be
complied with. Madame speaks French, I trust?"

"Sufficiently, I think, Monsieur," replied Katherine in that language.

"That is good. Pray be seated, Madame. I am M. Caux, the Commissary of
Police." He blew out his chest importantly, and Katherine tried to look
sufficiently impressed.

"You wish to see my passport?" she inquired. "Here it is."

The Commissary eyed her keenly and gave a little grunt.

"Thank you, Madame," he said, taking the passport from her. He cleared
his throat. "But what I really desire is a little information."

"Information?"

The Commissary nodded his head slowly.

"About a lady who has been a fellow-passenger of yours. You lunched
with her yesterday."

"I am afraid I can't tell you anything about her. We fell into
conversation over our meal, but she is a complete stranger to me. I
have never seen her before."

"And yet," said the Commissary sharply, "you returned to her
compartment with her after lunch and sat talking for some time?"

"Yes," said Katherine; "that is true."

The Commissary seemed to expect her to say something more. He looked at
her encouragingly.

"Yes, Madame?"

"Well, Monsieur?" said Katherine.

"You can, perhaps, give me some kind of idea of that conversation?"

"I could," said Katherine, "but at the moment I see no reason to do so."

In somewhat British fashion she felt annoyed. This foreign official
seemed to her impertinent.

"No reason?" cried the Commissary. "Oh yes, Madame, I can assure you
that there _is_ a reason."

"Then perhaps you will give it to me."

The Commissary rubbed his chin thoughtfully for a minute or two without
speaking.

"Madame," he said at last, "the reason is very simple. The lady in
question was found dead in her compartment this morning."

"Dead!" gasped Katherine. "What was it--heart failure?"

"No," said the Commissary in a reflective, dreamy voice. "No--she was
murdered."

"Murdered!" cried Katherine.

"So you see, Madame, why we are anxious for any information we can
possibly get."

"But surely her maid--"

"The maid has disappeared."

"Oh!" Katherine paused to assemble her thoughts.

"Since the conductor had seen you talking with her in her compartment,
he quite naturally reported the fact to the police, and that is why,
Madame, we have detained you, in the hope of gaining some information."

"I am very sorry," said Katherine; "I don't even know her name."

"Her name is Kettering. That we know from her passport and from the
labels on her luggage. If we--"

There was a knock on the compartment door. M. Caux frowned. He opened
it about six inches.

"What is the matter?" he said peremptorily. "I cannot be disturbed."

The egg-shaped head of Katherine's dinner acquaintance showed itself in
the aperture. On his face was a beaming smile.

"My name," he said, "is Hercule Poirot."

"Not," the Commissary stammered, "not _the_ Hercule Poirot?"

"The same," said M. Poirot. "I remember meeting you once, M. Caux, at
the _Sûreté_ in Paris, though doubtless you have forgotten me?"

"Not at all, Monsieur, not at all," declared the Commissary heartily.
"But enter, I pray of you. You know of this--"

"Yes, I know," said Hercule Poirot. "I came to see if I might be of any
assistance?"

"We should be flattered," replied the Commissary promptly. "Let me
present you, M. Poirot, to"--he consulted the passport he still held
in his hand--"to Madame--er--Mademoiselle Grey."

Poirot smiled across at Katherine.

"It is strange, is it not," he murmured, "that my words should have
come true so quickly?"

"Mademoiselle, alas! can tell us very little," said the Commissary.

"I have been explaining," said Katherine, "that this poor lady was a
complete stranger to me."

Poirot nodded.

"But she talked to you, did she not?" he said gently. "You formed an
impression--is it not so?"

"Yes," said Katherine thoughtfully. "I suppose I did."

"And that impression was--"

"Yes, Mademoiselle"--the Commissary jerked himself forward--"let us by
all means have your impressions."

Katherine sat turning the whole thing over in her mind. She felt in
a way as if she were betraying a confidence, but with that ugly word
"Murder" ringing in her ears she dared not keep anything back. Too much
might hang upon it. So, as nearly as she could, she repeated word for
word the conversation she had had with the dead woman.

"That is interesting," said the Commissary, glancing at the other. "Eh,
M. Poirot, that is interesting? Whether it has anything to do with the
crime--" He left the sentence unfinished.

"I suppose it could not be suicide," said Katherine, rather doubtfully.

"No," said the Commissary, "it could not be suicide. She was strangled
with a length of black cord."

"Oh!" Katherine shivered. M. Caux spread out his hands apologetically.
"It is not nice--no. I think that our train robbers are more brutal
than they are in your country."

"It is horrible."

"Yes, yes"--he was soothing and apologetic--"but you have great
courage, Mademoiselle. At once, as soon as I saw you, I said to myself,
'Mademoiselle has great courage.' That is why I am going to ask you
to do something more--something distressing, but I assure you very
necessary."

Katherine looked at him apprehensively.

He spread out his hands apologetically.

"I am going to ask you, Mademoiselle, to be so good as to accompany me
to the next compartment."

"Must I?" asked Katherine in a low voice.

"Some one must identify her," said the Commissary, "and since the maid
has disappeared"--he coughed significantly--"you appear to be the
person who has seen most of her since she joined the train."

"Very well," said Katherine quietly; "if it is necessary--"

She rose. Poirot gave her a little nod of approval.

"Mademoiselle is sensible," he said. "May I accompany you, M. Caux?"

"Enchanted, my dear M. Poirot."

They went out into the corridor, and M. Caux unlocked the door of the
dead woman's compartment. The blinds on the far side had been drawn
half-way up to admit light. The dead woman lay on the berth to their
left, in so natural a posture that one could have thought her asleep.
The bedclothes were drawn up over her, and her head was turned to the
wall, so that only the red auburn curls showed. Very gently M. Caux
laid a hand on her shoulder and turned the body back so that the face
came into view. Katherine flinched a little and dug her nails into
her palms. A heavy blow had disfigured the features almost beyond
recognition. Poirot gave a sharp exclamation.

"When was that done, I wonder?" he demanded. "Before death or after?"

"The doctor says after," said M. Caux.

"Strange," said Poirot, drawing his brows together. He turned to
Katherine. "Be brave, Mademoiselle; look at her well. Are you sure that
this is the woman you talked to in the train yesterday?"

Katherine had good nerves. She steeled herself to look long and
earnestly at the recumbent figure. Then she leaned forward and took up
the dead woman's hand.

"I am quite sure," she replied at length. "The face is too disfigured
to recognize, but the build and carriage and hair are exact, and
besides I noticed _this_"--she pointed to a tiny mole on the dead
woman's wrist--"while I was talking to her."

"_Bon_," approved Poirot. "You are an excellent witness, Mademoiselle.
There is, then, no question as to the identity, but it is strange, all
the same." He frowned down on the dead woman in perplexity.

M. Caux shrugged his shoulders.

"The murderer was carried away by rage, doubtless," he suggested.

"If she had been struck down, it would have been comprehensible," mused
Poirot, "but the man who strangled her slipped up behind and caught
her unawares. A little choke--a little gurgle--that is all that would
be heard, and then afterwards--that smashing blow on her face. Now
why? Did he hope that if the face were unrecognizable she might not
be identified? Or did he hate her so much that he could not resist
striking that blow even after she was dead?"

Katherine shuddered, and he turned at once to her kindly.

"You must not let me distress you, Mademoiselle," he said. "To you this
is all very new and terrible. To me, alas! it is an old story. One
moment, I pray of you both."

They stood against the door watching him as he went quickly round the
compartment. He noted the dead woman's clothes neatly folded on the
end of the berth, the big fur coat that hung from a hook, and the
little red lacquer hat tossed up on the rack. Then he passed through
into the adjoining compartment, that in which Katherine had seen the
maid sitting. Here the berth had not been made up. Three or four rugs
were piled loosely on the seat; there was a hat-box and a couple of
suit-cases. He turned suddenly to Katherine.

"You were in here yesterday," he said. "Do you see anything changed,
anything missing?"

Katherine looked carefully round both compartments.

"Yes," she said, "there is something missing--a scarlet morocco case.
It had the initials 'R. V. K.' on it. It might have been a small
dressing-case or a big jewel-case. When I saw it, the maid was holding
it."

"Ah!" said Poirot.

"But, surely," said Katherine. "I--of course, I don't know anything
about such things, but surely it is plain enough, if the maid and the
jewel-case are missing?"

"You mean that it was the maid who was the thief? No, Mademoiselle;
there is a very good reason against that."

"What?"

"The maid was left behind in Paris."

He turned to Poirot.

"I should like you to hear the conductor's story yourself," he murmured
confidentially. "It is very suggestive."

"Mademoiselle would doubtless like to hear it also," said Poirot. "You
do not object, Monsieur le Commissaire?"

"No," said the Commissary, who clearly did object very much. "No,
certainly, M. Poirot, if you say so. You have finished here?"

"I think so. One little minute."

He had been turning over the rugs, and now he took one to the window
and looked at it, picking something off it with his fingers.

"What is it?" demanded M. Caux sharply.

"Four auburn hairs." He bent over the dead woman. "Yes, they are from
the head of Madame."

"And what of it? Do you attach importance to them?"

Poirot let the rug drop back on the seat.

"What is important? What is not? One cannot say at this stage. But we
must note each little fact carefully."

They went back again into the first compartment, and in a minute or two
the conductor of the carriage arrived to be questioned.

"Your name is Pierre Michel?" said the Commissary.

"Yes, Monsieur le Commissaire."

"I should like you to repeat to this gentleman"--he indicated
Poirot--"the story that you told me as to what happened in Paris."

"Very good, Monsieur le Commissaire. It was after we had left the Gare
de Lyon. I came along to make the beds, thinking that Madame would be
at dinner, but she had a dinner basket in her compartment. She said
to me that she had been obliged to leave her maid behind in Paris, so
that I need make up only one berth. She took her dinner basket into the
adjoining compartment, and sat there while I made up the bed; then she
told me that she did not wish to be wakened early in the morning, that
she liked to sleep on. I told her I quite understood, and she wished me
'good-night.'"

"You yourself did not go into the adjoining compartment?"

"No, Monsieur."

"Then you did not happen to notice if a scarlet morocco case was
amongst the luggage there?"

"No, Monsieur, I did not."

"Would it have been possible for a man to have been concealed in the
adjoining compartment?"

The conductor reflected.

"The door was half open," he said. "If a man had stood behind that door
I should not have been able to see him, but he would, of course, have
been perfectly visible to Madame when she went in there."

"Quite so," said Poirot. "Is there anything more you have to tell us?"

"I think that is all, Monsieur. I can remember nothing else."

"And now this morning?" prompted Poirot.

"As Madame had ordered, I did not disturb her. It was not until just
before Cannes that I ventured to knock at the door. Getting no reply, I
opened it. The lady appeared to be in her bed asleep. I took her by the
shoulder to rouse her, and then--"

"And then you saw what had happened," volunteered Poirot. "_Très bien._
I think I know all I want to know."

"I hope, Monsieur le Commissaire, it is not that I have been guilty of
any negligence," said the man piteously. "Such an affair to happen on
the Blue Train! It is horrible."

"Console yourself," said the Commissary. "Everything will be done to
keep the affair as quiet as possible, if only in the interests of
justice. I cannot think you have been guilty of any negligence."

"And Monsieur le Commissaire will report as much to the Company?"

"But certainly, but certainly," said M. Caux impatiently. "That will do
now."

The conductor withdrew.

"According to the medical evidence," said the Commissary, "the lady
was probably dead before the train reached Lyons. Who then was the
murderer? From Mademoiselle's story, it seems clear that somewhere on
her journey she was to meet this man of whom she spoke. Her action in
getting rid of the maid seems significant. Did the man join the train
at Paris, and did she conceal him in the adjoining compartment? If so,
they may have quarrelled, and he may have killed her in a fit of rage.
That is one possibility. The other, and the more likely to my mind, is
that her assailant was a train robber travelling on the train; that
he stole along the corridor unseen by the conductor, killed her, and
went off with the red morocco case, which doubtless contained jewels of
some value. In all probability he left the train at Lyons, and we have
already telegraphed to the station there for full particulars of any
one seen leaving the train."

"Or he might have come on to Nice," suggested Poirot.

"He might," agreed the Commissary, "but that would be a very bold
course."

Poirot let a minute or two go by before speaking, and then he said:

"In the latter case you think the man was an ordinary train robber?"

The Commissary shrugged his shoulders.

"It depends. We must get hold of the maid. It is possible that she has
the red morocco case with her. If so, then the man of whom she spoke to
Mademoiselle may be concerned in the case, and the affair is a crime
of passion. I myself think the solution of a train robber is the more
probable. These bandits have become very bold of late."

Poirot looked suddenly across to Katherine.

"And you, Mademoiselle," he said, "you heard and saw nothing during the
night?"

"Nothing," said Katherine.

Poirot turned to the Commissary.

"We need detain Mademoiselle no longer, I think," he suggested.

The latter nodded.

"She will leave us her address?" he said.

Katherine gave him the name of Lady Tamplin's villa. Poirot made her a
little bow.

"You permit that I see you again, Mademoiselle?" he said. "Or have you
so many friends that your time will be all taken up?"

"On the contrary," said Katherine, "I shall have plenty of leisure, and
I shall be very pleased to see you again."

"Excellent," said Poirot, and gave her a little friendly nod. "This
shall be a _'roman policier' à nous_. We will investigate this affair
together."




                      12. At the Villa Marguerite


"Then you were really in the thick of it all!" said Lady Tamplin
enviously. "My dear, how thrilling!" She opened her china blue eyes
very wide and gave a little sigh.

"A real murder," said Mr. Evans gloatingly.

"Of course Chubby had no idea of anything of the kind," went on Lady
Tamplin; "he simply could _not_ imagine why the police wanted you. My
dear, what an opportunity! I think, you know--yes, I certainly think
something might be made out of this."

A calculating look rather marred the ingenuousness of the blue eyes.

Katherine felt slightly uncomfortable. They were just finishing lunch,
and she looked in turn at the three people sitting round the table.
Lady Tamplin, full of practical schemes; Mr. Evans, beaming with naïve
appreciation, and Lenox with a queer crooked smile on her dark face.

"Marvellous luck," murmured Chubby; "I wish I could have gone along
with you--and seen--all the exhibits."

His tone was wistful and childlike.

Katherine said nothing. The police had laid no injunctions of secrecy
upon her, and it was clearly impossible to suppress the bare facts or
try to keep them from her hostess. But she did rather wish it had been
possible to do so.

"Yes," said Lady Tamplin, coming suddenly out of her reverie, "I do
think something might be done. A little account, you know, cleverly
written up. An eye-witness, a feminine touch: '_How I chatted with the
dead woman, little thinking_--' that sort of thing, you know."

"Rot!" said Lenox.

"You have no idea," said Lady Tamplin in a soft, wistful voice, "what
newspapers will pay for a little titbit! Written, of course, by some
one of really unimpeachable social position. You would not like to do
it yourself, I dare say, Katherine dear, but just give me the bare
bones of it, and _I_ will manage the whole thing for you. Mr. de
Haviland is a special friend of mine. We have a little understanding
together. A most delightful man--not at all reporterish. How does the
idea strike you, Katherine?"

"I would much prefer to do nothing of the kind," said Katherine bluntly.

Lady Tamplin was rather disconcerted at this uncompromising refusal.
She sighed and turned to the elucidation of further details.

"A very striking-looking woman, you said? I wonder now who she could
have been. You didn't hear her name?"

"It was mentioned," Katherine admitted, "but I can't remember it. You
see, I was rather upset."

"I should think so," said Mr. Evans; "it must have been a beastly
shock."

It is to be doubted whether, even if Katherine had remembered the
name, she would have admitted the fact. Lady Tamplin's remorseless
cross-examination was making her restive. Lenox, who was observant in
her own way, noticed this, and offered to take Katherine upstairs to
see her room. She left her there, remarking kindly before she went:
"You mustn't mind Mother; she would make a few pennies' profit out of
her dying grandmother if she could."

Lenox went down again to find her mother and her step-father discussing
the newcomer.

"Presentable," said Lady Tamplin, "quite presentable. Her clothes are
all right. That grey thing is the same model that Gladys Cooper wore in
_Palm Trees in Egypt_."

"Have you noticed her eyes--what?" interposed Mr. Evans.

"Never mind her eyes, Chubby," said Lady Tamplin tartly; "we are
discussing the things that really matter."

"Oh, quite," said Mr. Evans, and retired into his shell.

"She doesn't seem to me very--malleable," said Lady Tamplin, rather
hesitating to choose the right word.

"She has all the instincts of a lady, as they say in books," said
Lenox, with a grin.

"Narrow-minded," murmured Lady Tamplin. "Inevitable under the
circumstances, I suppose."

"I expect you will do your best to broaden her," said Lenox, with a
grin, "but you will have your work cut out. Just now, you noticed, she
stuck down her fore feet and laid back her ears and refused to budge."

"Anyway," said Lady Tamplin hopefully, "she doesn't look to me at all
mean. Some people, when they come into money, seem to attach undue
importance to it."

"Oh, you'll easily touch her for what you want," said Lenox; "and,
after all, that is all that matters, isn't it? That is what she is here
for."

"She is my own cousin," said Lady Tamplin, with dignity.

"Cousin, eh?" said Mr. Evans, waking up again. "I suppose I call her
Katherine, don't I?"

"It is of no importance at all what you call her, Chubby," said Lady
Tamplin.

"Good," said Mr. Evans; "then I will. Do you suppose she plays tennis?"
he added hopefully.

"Of course not," said Lady Tamplin. "She has been a companion, I tell
you. Companions don't play tennis--or golf. They might possibly play
golf-croquet, but I have always understood that they wind wool and wash
dogs most of the day."

"O God!" said Mr. Evans; "do they really?"

Lenox drifted upstairs again to Katherine's room. "Can I help you?" she
asked rather perfunctorily.

On Katherine's disclaimer, Lenox sat on the edge of the bed and stared
thoughtfully at her guest.

"Why did you come?" she said at last. "To us, I mean. We're not your
sort."

"Oh, I am anxious to get into Society."

"Don't be an ass," said Lenox promptly, detecting the flicker of a
smile. "You know what I mean well enough. You are not a bit what I
thought you would be. I say, you _have_ got some decent clothes." She
sighed. "Clothes are no good to me. I was born awkward. It's a pity,
because I love them."

"I love them too," said Katherine, "but it has not been much use my
loving them up to now. Do you think this is nice?"

She and Lenox discussed several models with artistic fervour.

"I like you," said Lenox suddenly. "I came up to warn you not to be
taken in by Mother, but I think now that there is no need to do that.
You are frightfully sincere and upright and all those queer things, but
you are not a fool. Oh hell! what is it now?"

Lady Tamplin's voice was calling plaintively from the hall:

"Lenox, DerekKettering has just rung up. He wants to come to dinner to-night.
Will it be all right? I mean, we haven't got anything awkward, like
quails, have we?"

Lenox reassured her and came back into Katherine's room. Her face
looked brighter and less sullen.

"I'm glad old DerekKettering is coming," she said; "you'll like him."

"Who is DerekKettering?"

"He is Lord Leconbury's son, married a rich American woman. Women are
simply potty about him."

"Why?"

"Oh, the usual reason--very good-looking and a regular bad lot. Every
one goes off their head about him."

"Do you?"

"Sometimes I do," said Lenox, "and sometimes I think I would like to
marry a nice curate and live in the country and grow things in frames."
She paused a minute, and then added, "An Irish curate would be best,
and then I should hunt."

After a minute or two she reverted to her former theme. "There is
something queer about DerekKettering. All that family are a bit potty--mad
gamblers, you know. In the old days they used to gamble away their
wives and their estates, and did most reckless things just for the love
of it. DerekKettering would have made a perfect highwayman--debonair and gay,
just the right manner." She moved to the door. "Well, come down when
you feel like it."

Left alone, Katherine gave herself up to thought. Just at present she
felt thoroughly ill at ease and jarred by her surroundings. The shock
of the discovery in the train and the reception of the news by her
new friends jarred upon her susceptibilities. She thought long and
earnestly about the murdered woman. She had been sorry for Ruth, but
she could not honestly say that she had liked her. She had divined only
too well the ruthless egoism that was the keynote of her personality,
and it repelled her.

She had been amused and a trifle hurt by the other's cool dismissal of
her when she had served her turn. That she had come to some decision,
Katherine was quite certain, but she wondered now what that decision
had been. Whatever it was, death had stepped in and made all decisions
meaningless. Strange that it should have been so, and that a brutal
crime should have been the ending of that fateful journey. But suddenly
Katherine remembered a small fact that she ought, perhaps, to have told
the police--a fact that had for the moment escaped her memory. Was it
of any real importance? She had certainly thought that she had seen a
man going into that particular compartment, but she realized that she
might easily have been mistaken. It might have been the compartment
next door, and certainly the man in question could be no train robber.
She recalled him very clearly as she had seen him on those two
previous occasions--once at the Savoy and once at Cook's office. No,
doubtless she had been mistaken. He had not gone into the dead woman's
compartment, and it was perhaps as well that she had said nothing to
the police. She might have done incalculable harm by doing so.

She went down to join the others on the terrace outside. Through the
branches of mimosa, she looked out over the blue of the Mediterranean,
and, whilst listening with half an ear to Lady Tamplin's chatter, she
was glad that she had come. This was better than St. Mary Mead.

That evening she put on the mauvy pink dress that went by the name of
_soupir d'automne_, and after smiling at her reflection in the mirror,
went downstairs with, for the first time in her life, a faint feeling
of shyness.

Most of Lady Tamplin's guests had arrived, and since noise was the
essential of Lady Tamplin's parties, the din was already terrific.
Chubby rushed up to Katherine, pressed a cocktail upon her, and took
her under his wing.

"Oh, here you are, DerekKettering," cried Lady Tamplin, as the door opened to
admit the last comer. "Now at last we can have something to eat. I am
starving."

Katherine looked across the room. She was startled. So this--was DerekKettering,
and she realized that she was not surprised. She had always known that
she would some day meet the man whom she had seen three times by such
a curious chain of coincidences. She thought, too, that he recognized
her. He paused abruptly in what he was saying to Lady Tamplin, and
went on again as though with an effort. They all went into dinner, and
Katherine found that he was placed beside her. He turned to her at once
with a vivid smile.

"I knew I was going to meet you soon," he remarked, "but I never dreamt
that it would be here. It had to be, you know. Once at the Savoy and
once at Cook's--never twice without three times. Don't say you can't
remember me or never noticed me. I insist upon your pretending that you
noticed me, anyway."

"Oh, I did," said Katherine; "but this is not the third time. It is the
fourth. I saw you on the Blue Train."

"On the Blue Train!" Something undefinable came over his manner; she
could not have said just what it was. It was as though he had received
a check, a setback. Then he said carelessly:

"What was the rumpus this morning? Somebody had died, hadn't they?"

"Yes," said Katherine slowly; "somebody had died."

"You shouldn't die on a train," remarked DerekKettering flippantly. "I believe
it causes all sorts of legal and international complications, and it
gives the train an excuse for being even later than usual."

"DerekKettering?" A stout American lady, who was sitting opposite,
leaned forward and spoke to him with the deliberate intonation of her
race. "DerekKettering, I do believe you have forgotten me, and I thought
you such a perfectly lovely man."

DerekKettering leaned forward, answering her, and Katherine sat almost dazed.

DerekKettering! That was the name, of course! She remembered it now--but
what a strange, ironical situation! Here was this man whom she had seen
go into his wife's compartment last night, who had left her alive and
well, and now he was sitting at dinner, quite unconscious of the fate
that had befallen her. Of that there was no doubt. He did not know.

A servant was leaning over DerekKettering, handing him a note and murmuring in
his ear. With a word of excuse to Lady Tamplin, he broke it open, and
an expression of utter astonishment came over his face as he read; then
he looked at his hostess.

"This is most extraordinary. I say, Rosalie, I am afraid I will have to
leave you. The Prefect of Police wants to see me at once. I can't think
what about."

"Your sins have found you out," remarked Lenox.

"They must have," said DerekKettering; "probably some idiotic nonsense, but I
suppose I shall have to push off to the Prefecture. How dare the old
boy rout me out from dinner? It ought to be something deadly serious to
justify that," and he laughed as he pushed back his chair and rose to
leave the room.




                     13. Van Aldin Gets a Telegram


On the afternoon of the 15th of February a thick yellow fog had settled
down on London. Rufus Van Aldin was in his suite at the Savoy and was
making the most of the atmospheric conditions by working double time.
MajorKnighton was overjoyed. He had found it difficult of late to get his
employer to concentrate on the matters in hand. When he had ventured to
urge certain courses, Van Aldin had put him off with a curt word. But
now Van Aldin seemed to be throwing himself into work with redoubled
energy, and the secretary made the most of his opportunities. Always
tactful, he plied the spur so unobtrusively that Van Aldin never
suspected it.

Yet in the middle of this absorption in business matters, one
little fact lay at the back of Van Aldin's mind. A chance remark of
MajorKnighton's, uttered by the secretary in all unconsciousness, had given
rise to it. It now festered unseen, gradually reaching further and
further forward into Van Aldin's consciousness, until at last, in spite
of himself, he had to yield to its insistence.

He listened to what MajorKnighton was saying with his usual air of keen
attention, but in reality not one word of it penetrated his mind. He
nodded automatically, however, and the secretary turned to some other
papers. As he was sorting them out, his employer spoke:

"Do you mind telling me that over again, MajorKnighton?"

For a moment MajorKnighton was at a loss.

"You mean about this, sir?" He held up a closely written Company report.

"No, no," said Van Aldin; "what you told me about seeing Ruth's maid in
Paris last night. I can't make it out. You must have been mistaken."

"I can't have been mistaken, sir; I actually spoke to her."

"Well, tell me the whole thing again."

MajorKnighton complied.

"I had fixed up the deal with Bartheimers," he explained, "and had gone
back to the Ritz to pick up my traps preparatory to having dinner and
catching the nine o'clock train from the Gare du Nord. At the reception
desk I saw a woman whom I was quite sure was Mrs. Kettering's maid. I
went up to her and asked if Mrs. Kettering was staying there."

"Yes, yes," said Van Aldin. "Of course. Naturally. And she told you
that Ruth had gone on to the Riviera and had sent her to the Ritz to
await further orders there?"

"Exactly that, sir."

"It is very odd," said Van Aldin. "Very odd, indeed, unless the woman
had been impertinent or something of that kind."

"In that case," objected MajorKnighton, "surely Mrs. Kettering would have
paid her down a sum of money, and told her to go back to England. She
would hardly have sent her to the Ritz."

"No," muttered the millionaire; "that's true."

He was about to say something further, but checked himself. He was
fond of MajorKnighton and liked and trusted him, but he could hardly discuss
his daughter's private affairs with his secretary. He had already felt
hurt by Ruth's lack of frankness, and this chance information which had
come to him did nothing to allay his misgivings.

Why had Ruth got rid of her maid in Paris? What possible object or
motive could she have had in so doing?

He reflected for a moment or two on the curious combination of chance.
How should it have occurred to Ruth, except as the wildest coincidence,
that the first person that the maid should run across in Paris should
be her father's secretary? Ah, but that was the way things happened.
That was the way things got found out.

He winced at the last phrase; it had arisen with complete naturalness
to his mind. Was there then "something to be found out"? He hated to
put this question to himself; he had no doubt of the answer. The answer
was--he was sure of it--Armand de la Roche.

It was bitter to Van Aldin that a daughter of his should be gulled
by such a man, yet he was forced to admit that she was in good
company--that other well-bred and intelligent women had succumbed just
as easily to the Count's fascination. Men saw through him, women did
not.

He sought now for a phrase that would allay any suspicion that his
secretary might have felt.

"Ruth is always changing her mind about things at a moment's notice,"
he remarked, and then he added in a would-be careless tone: "The maid
didn't give any--er--reason for this change of plan?"

MajorKnighton was careful to make his voice as natural as possible as he
replied:

"She said, sir, that Mrs. Kettering had met a friend unexpectedly."

"Is that so?"

The secretary's practised ears caught the note of strain underlying the
seemingly casual tone.

"Oh, I see. Man or woman?"

"I think she said a man, sir."

Van Aldin nodded. His worst fears were being realized. He rose from
his chair, and began pacing up and down the room, a habit of his when
agitated. Unable to contain his feelings any longer, he burst forth:

"There is one thing no man can do, and that is to get a woman to
listen to reason. Somehow or other, they don't seem to have any kind of
_sense_. Talk of woman's instinct--why, it is well known all the world
over that a woman is the surest mark for any rascally swindler. Not one
in ten of them knows a scoundrel when she meets one; they can be preyed
on by any good-looking fellow with a soft side to his tongue. If I had
my way--"

He was interrupted. A page-boy entered with a telegram. Van Aldin tore
it open, and his face went a sudden chalky white. He caught hold of the
back of a chair to steady himself, and waved the page-boy from the room.

"What's the matter, sir?"

MajorKnighton had risen in concern.

"Ruth!" said Van Aldin hoarsely.

"Mrs. Kettering?"

"Killed!"

"An accident to the train?"

Van Aldin shook his head.

"No. From this it seems she has been robbed as well. They don't use the
word, MajorKnighton, but my poor girl has been murdered."

"Oh, my God, sir!"

Van Aldin tapped the telegram with his forefinger.

"This is from the police at Nice. I must go out there by the first
train."

MajorKnighton was efficient as ever. He glanced at the clock.

"Five o'clock from Victoria, sir."

"That's right. You will come with me, MajorKnighton. Tell my man, Archer,
and pack your own things. See to everything here. I want to go round to
Curzon Street."

The telephone rang sharply, and the secretary lifted the receiver.

"Yes; who is it?"

Then to Van Aldin.

"Mr. Goby, sir."

"Goby? I can't see him now. No--wait, we have plenty of time. Tell them
to send him up."

Van Aldin was a strong man. Already he had recovered that iron calm of
his. Few people would have noticed anything amiss in his greeting to
Mr. Goby.

"I am pressed for time, Goby. Got anything important to tell me?"

Mr. Goby coughed.

"The movements of DerekKettering , sir. You wished them reported to you."

"Yes--well?"

"DerekKettering, sir, left London for the Riviera yesterday morning."

"What?"

Something in his voice must have startled Mr. Goby. That worthy
gentleman departed from his usual practice of never looking at the
person to whom he was talking, and stole a fleeting glance at the
millionaire.

"What train did he go on?" demanded Van Aldin.

"The Blue Train, sir."

Mr. Goby coughed again and spoke to the clock on the mantelpiece.

"Mademoiselle Mirelle, the dancer from the Parthenon, went by the same
train."




                         14. Ada AdaMason's Story


"I cannot repeat to you often enough, Monsieur, our horror, our
consternation, and the deep sympathy we feel for you."

Thus M. Carrège, the Juge d'Instruction, addressed Van Aldin. M.
Caux, the Commissary, made sympathetic noises in his throat. Van
Aldin brushed away horror, consternation, and sympathy with an abrupt
gesture. The scene was the Examining Magistrate's room at Nice. Besides
M. Carrège, the Commissary, and Van Aldin, there was a further person
in the room. It was that person who now spoke.

"M. Van Aldin," he said, "desires action--swift action."

"Ah!" cried the Commissary, "I have not yet presented you. M. Van
Aldin, this is M. Hercule Poirot; you have doubtless heard of him.
Although he has retired from his profession for some years now,
his name is still a household word as one of the greatest living
detectives."

"Pleased to meet you, M. Poirot," said Van Aldin, falling back
mechanically on a formula that he had discarded some years ago. "You
have retired from your profession?"

"That is so, Monsieur. Now I enjoy the world."

The little man made a grandiloquent gesture.

"M. Poirot happened to be travelling on the Blue Train," explained the
Commissary, "and he has been so kind as to assist us out of his vast
experience."

The millionaire looked at Poirot keenly. Then he said unexpectedly:

"I am a very rich man, M. Poirot. It is usually said that a rich man
labours under the belief that he can buy everything and every one. That
is not true. I am a big man in my way, and one big man can ask a favour
from another big man."

Poirot nodded a quick appreciation.

"That is very well said, M. Van Aldin. I place myself entirely at your
service."

"Thank you," said Van Aldin. "I can only say call upon me at any time,
and you will not find me ungrateful. And now, gentlemen, to business."

"I propose," said M. Carrège, "to interrogate the maid, Ada AdaMason. You
have her here, I understand?"

"Yes," said Van Aldin. "We picked her up in Paris in passing through.
She was very upset to hear of her mistress's death, but she tells her
story coherently enough."

"We will have her in, then," said M. Carrège.

He rang the bell on his desk, and in a few minutes Ada AdaMason entered
the room.

She was very neatly dressed in black, and the tip of her nose was red.
She had exchanged her grey travelling gloves for a pair of black suède
ones. She cast a look round the Examining Magistrate's office in some
trepidation, and seemed relieved at the presence of her mistress's
father. The Examining Magistrate prided himself on his geniality of
manner, and did his best to put her at her ease. He was helped in this
by Poirot, who acted as interpreter, and whose friendly manner was
reassuring to the Englishwoman.

"Your name is Ada AdaMason; is that right?"

"Ada Beatrice I was christened, sir," said AdaMason primly.

"Just so. And we can understand, AdaMason, that this has all been very
distressing."

"Oh, indeed it has, sir. I have been with many ladies and always given
satisfaction, I hope, and I never dreamt of anything of this kind
happening in any situation where I was."

"No, no," said M. Carrège.

"Naturally I have read of such things, of course, in the Sunday papers.
And then I always have understood that those foreign trains--" She
suddenly checked her flow, remembering that the gentlemen who were
speaking to her were of the same nationality as the trains.

"Now let us talk this affair over," said M. Carrège. "There was, I
understand, no question of your staying in Paris when you started from
London?"

"Oh no, sir. We were to go straight through to Nice."

"Have you ever been abroad with your mistress before?"

"No, sir. I had only been with her two months, you see."

"Did she seem quite as usual when starting on this journey?"

"She was worried like and a bit upset, and she was rather irritable and
difficult to please."

M. Carrège nodded.

"Now then, AdaMason, what was the first you heard of your stopping in
Paris?"

"It was at the place they call the Gare de Lyon, sir. My mistress was
thinking of getting out and walking up and down the platform. She was
just going out into the corridor when she gave a sudden exclamation,
and came back into her compartment with a gentleman. She shut the door
between her carriage and mine, so that I didn't see or hear anything,
till she suddenly opened it again and told me that she had changed her
plans. She gave me some money and told me to get out and go to the
Ritz. They knew her well there, she said, and would give me a room. I
was to wait there until I heard from her; she would wire me what she
wanted me to do. I had just time to get my things together and jump out
of the train before it started off. It was a rush."

"While Mrs. Kettering was telling you this, where was the gentleman?"

"He was standing in the other compartment, sir, looking out of the
window."

"Can you describe him to us?"

"Well, you see, sir, I hardly saw him. He had his back to me most of
the time. He was a tall gentleman and dark; that's all I can say. He
was dressed very like any other gentleman in a dark blue overcoat and a
grey hat."

"Was he one of the passengers on the train?"

"I don't think so, sir; I took it that he had come to the station to
see Mrs. Kettering in passing through. Of course he might have been one
of the passengers; I never thought of that."

AdaMason seemed a little flurried by the suggestion.

"Ah!" M. Carrège passed lightly to another subject. "Your mistress
later requested the conductor not to rouse her early in the morning.
Was that a likely thing for her to do, do you think?"

"Oh yes, sir. The mistress never ate any breakfast and she didn't sleep
well at nights, so that she liked sleeping on in the morning."

Again M. Carrège passed to another subject.

"Amongst the luggage there was a scarlet morocco case, was there not?"
he asked. "Your mistress's jewel-case?"

"Yes, sir."

"Did you take that case to the Ritz?"

"_Me_ take the mistress's jewel-case to the Ritz! Oh no, indeed, sir."
AdaMason's tones were horrified.

"You left it behind you in the carriage?"

"Yes, sir."

"Had your mistress many jewels with her, do you know?"

"A fair amount, sir; made me a bit uneasy sometimes, I can tell you,
with those nasty tales you hear of being robbed in foreign countries.
They were insured, I know, but all the same it seemed a frightful risk.
Why, the rubies alone, the mistress told me, were worth several hundred
thousand pounds."

"The rubies! What rubies?" barked Van Aldin suddenly.

AdaMason turned to him.

"I think it was you who gave them to her, sir, not very long ago."

"My God!" cried Van Aldin. "You don't say she had those rubies with
her? I told her to leave them at the Bank."

AdaMason gave once more the discreet cough which was apparently part of
her stock-in-trade as a lady's maid. This time it expressed a good
deal. It expressed far more clearly than words could have done, that
AdaMason's mistress had been a lady who took her own way.

"Ruth must have been mad," muttered Van Aldin. "What on earth could
have possessed her?"

M. Carrège in turn gave vent to a cough, again a cough of significance.
It riveted Van Aldin's attention on him.

"For the moment," said M. Carrège, addressing AdaMason, "I think that is
all. If you will go into the next room, Mademoiselle, they will read
over to you the questions and answers, and you will sign accordingly."

AdaMason went out escorted by the clerk, and Van Aldin said immediately to
the Magistrate:

"Well?"

M. Carrège opened a drawer in his desk, took out a letter, and handed
it across to Van Aldin.

"This was found in Madame's handbag."

    _"Chère Amie" (the letter ran)--"I will obey you; I will be
    prudent, discreet--all those things that a lover most hates. Paris
    would perhaps have been unwise, but the Isles d'Or are far away
    from the world, and you may be assured that nothing will leak out.
    It is like you and your divine sympathy to be so interested in the
    work on famous jewels that I am writing. It will, indeed, be an
    extraordinary privilege to actually see and handle these historic
    rubies. I am devoting a special passage to 'Heart of Fire.' My
    wonderful one! Soon I will make up to you for all those sad years
    of separation and emptiness.--Your ever-adoring,_

                                                            "_Armand._"




                       15. The Comte de la Roche


Van Aldin read the letter through in silence. His face turned a dull
angry crimson. The men watching him saw the veins start out on his
forehead, and his big hands clench themselves unconsciously. He handed
back the letter without a word. M. Carrège was looking with close
attention at his desk, M. Caux's eyes were fixed upon the ceiling, and
M. Hercule Poirot was tenderly brushing a speck of dust from his coat
sleeve. With the greatest tact they none of them looked at Van Aldin.

It was M. Carrège, mindful of his status and his duties, who tackled
the unpleasant subject.

"Perhaps, Monsieur," he murmured, "you are aware by whom--er--this
letter was written?"

"Yes, I know," said Van Aldin heavily.

"Ah?" said the Magistrate inquiringly.

"A scoundrel who calls himself the Comte de la Roche."

There was a pause; then M. Poirot leaned forward, straightened a ruler
on the judge's desk, and addressed the millionaire directly.

"M. Van Aldin, we are all sensible, deeply sensible, of the pain it
must give you to speak of these matters, but believe me, Monsieur, it
is not the time for concealments. If justice is to be done, we must
know everything. If you will reflect a little minute you will realize
the truth of that clearly for yourself."

Van Aldin was silent for a moment or two, then almost reluctantly he
nodded his head in agreement.

"You are quite right, M. Poirot," he said. "Painful as it is, I have no
right to keep anything back."

The Commissary gave a sigh of relief, and the Examining Magistrate
leaned back in his chair and adjusted a pince-nez on his long thin nose.

"Perhaps you will tell us in your own words, M. Van Aldin," he said,
"all that you know of this gentleman."

"It began eleven or twelve years ago--in Paris. My daughter was a young
girl then, full of foolish, romantic notions, like all young girls are.
Unknown to me, she made the acquaintance of this Comte de la Roche. You
have heard of him, perhaps?"

The Commissary and Poirot nodded in assent.

"He calls himself the Comte de la Roche," continued Van Aldin, "but I
doubt if he has any right to the title."

"You would not have found his name in the _Almanach de Gotha_," agreed
the Commissary.

"I discovered as much," said Van Aldin. "The man was a good-looking,
plausible scoundrel, with a fatal fascination for women. Ruth was
infatuated with him, but I soon put a stop to the whole affair. The man
was no better than a common swindler."

"You are quite right," said the Commissary. "The Comte de la Roche is
well known to us. If it were possible, we should have laid him by the
heels before now, but _ma foi!_ it is not easy; the fellow is cunning,
his affairs are always conducted with ladies of high social position.
If he obtains money from them under false pretences or as the fruit
of blackmail, _eh bien!_ naturally they will not prosecute. To look
foolish in the eyes of the world, oh no, that would never do, and he
has an extraordinary power over women."

"That is so," said the millionaire heavily. "Well, as I told you, I
broke the affair up pretty sharply. I told Ruth exactly what he was,
and she had, perforce, to believe me. About a year afterwards, she met
her present husband and married him. As far as I knew, that was the end
of the matter; but only a week ago, I discovered, to my amazement, that
my daughter had resumed her acquaintance with the Comte de la Roche.
She had been meeting him frequently in London and Paris. I remonstrated
with her on her imprudence, for I may tell you gentlemen, that, on my
insistence, she was preparing to bring a suit for divorce against her
husband."

"That is interesting," murmured Poirot softly, his eyes on the ceiling.

Van Aldin looked at him sharply, and then went on.

"I pointed out to her the folly of continuing to see the Comte under
the circumstances. I thought she agreed with me."

The Examining Magistrate coughed delicately.

"But according to this letter--" he began, and then stopped.

Van Aldin's jaw set itself squarely.

"I know. It's no good mincing matters. However unpleasant, we have got
to face facts. It seems clear that Ruth had arranged to go to Paris and
meet de la Roche there. After my warnings to her, however, she must
have written to the Count suggesting a change of rendezvous."

"The Isles d'Or," said the Commissary thoughtfully, "are situated just
opposite Hyères, a remote and idyllic spot."

Van Aldin nodded.

"My God! How could Ruth be such a fool?" he exclaimed bitterly. "All
this talk about writing a book on jewels! Why, he must have been after
the rubies from the first."

"There are some very famous rubies," said Poirot, "originally part of
the Crown jewels of Russia; they are unique in character, and their
value is almost fabulous. There has been a rumour that they have lately
passed into the possession of an American. Are we right in concluding,
Monsieur, that you were the purchaser?"

"Yes," said Van Aldin. "They came into my possession in Paris about ten
days ago."

"Pardon me, Monsieur, but you have been negotiating for their purchase
for some time?"

"A little over two months. Why?"

"These things become known," said Poirot. "There is always a pretty
formidable crowd on the track of jewels such as these."

A spasm distorted the other's face.

"I remember," he said brokenly, "a joke I made to Ruth when I gave them
to her. I told her not to take them to the Riviera with her, as I could
not afford to have her robbed and murdered for the sake of the jewels.
My God! the things one says--never dreaming or knowing they will come
true."

There was a sympathetic silence, and then Poirot spoke in a detached
manner.

"Let us arrange our facts with order and precision. According to our
present theory, this is how they run. The Comte de la Roche knows of
your purchase of these jewels. By an easy stratagem he induces Madame
Kettering to bring the stones with her. He, then, is the man AdaMason saw
in the train at Paris."

The other three nodded in agreement.

"Madame is surprised to see him, but she deals with the situation
promptly. AdaMason is got out of the way; a dinner basket is ordered.
We know from the conductor that he made up the berth for the first
compartment, but he did not go into the second compartment, and that
a man could quite well have been concealed from him. So far the Comte
could have been hidden to a marvel. No one knows of his presence on the
train except Madame; he has been careful that the maid did not see his
face. All that she could say is that he was tall and dark. It is all
most conveniently vague. They are alone--and the train rushes through
the night. There would be no outcry, no struggle, for the man is, so
she thinks, her lover."

He turned gently to Van Aldin.

"Death, Monsieur, must have been almost instantaneous. We will pass
over that quickly. The Comte takes the jewel-case which lies ready to
his hand. Shortly afterwards the train draws into Lyons."

M. Carrège nodded his approval.

"Precisely. The conductor without descends. It would be easy for our
man to leave the train unseen; it would be easy to catch a train back
to Paris or anywhere he pleases. And the crime would be put down as an
ordinary train robbery. But for the letter found in Madame's bag, the
Comte would not have been mentioned."

"It was an oversight on his part not to search that bag," declared the
Commissary.

"Without doubt he thought she had destroyed that letter. It was--pardon
me, Monsieur--it was an indiscretion of the first water to keep it."

"And yet," murmured Poirot, "it was an indiscretion the Comte might
have foreseen."

"You mean?"

"I mean we are all agreed on one point, and that is that the Comte de
la Roche knows one subject _à fond_: Women. How was it that, knowing
women as he does, he did not foresee that Madame would have kept that
letter?"

"Yes--yes," said the Examining Magistrate doubtfully, "there is
something in what you say. But at such times, you understand, a man
is not master of himself. He does not reason calmly. _Mon Dieu!_" he
added, with feeling, "if our criminals kept their heads and acted with
intelligence, how should we capture them?"

Poirot smiled to himself.

"It seems to me a clear case," said the other, "but a difficult one
to prove. The Comte is a slippery customer, and unless the maid can
identify him--"

"Which is most unlikely," said Poirot.

"True, true." The Examining Magistrate rubbed his chin. "It is going to
be difficult."

"If he did indeed commit the crime--" began Poirot. M. Caux interrupted.

"If--you say _if_?"

"Yes, Monsieur le Juge, I say _if_."

The other looked at him sharply. "You are right," he said at last, "we
go too fast. It is possible that the Comte may have an alibi. Then we
should look foolish."

"_Ah, ça par exemple_," replied Poirot, "that is of no importance
whatever. Naturally, if he committed the crime he will have an alibi. A
man with the Comte's experience does not neglect to take precautions.
No, I said _if_ for a very different reason."

"And what was that?"

Poirot wagged an emphatic forefinger. "The psychology."

"Eh?" said the Commissary.

"The psychology is at fault. The Comte is a scoundrel--yes. The Comte
is a swindler--yes. The Comte preys upon women--yes. He proposes to
steal Madame's jewels--again yes. Is he the kind of man to commit
murder? I say _no_! A man of the type of the Comte is always a coward;
he takes no risks. He plays the safe, the mean, what the English call
the low-down game; but murder, a hundred times no!" He shook his head
in a dissatisfied manner.

The Examining Magistrate, however, did not seem disposed to agree with
him.

"The day always comes when such gentry lose their heads and go too
far," he observed sagely. "Doubtless that is the case here. Without
wishing to disagree with you, M. Poirot--"

"It was only an opinion," Poirot hastened to explain. "The case is, of
course, in your hands, and you will do what seems fit to you."

"I am satisfied in my own mind that the Comte de la Roche is the man we
need to get hold of," said M. Carrège. "You agree with me, Monsieur le
Commissaire?"

"Perfectly."

"And you, M. Van Aldin?"

"Yes," said the millionaire. "Yes; the man is a thorough-paced villain,
no doubt about it."

"It will be difficult to lay hands on him, I am afraid," said the
Magistrate, "but we will do our best. Telegraphed instructions shall go
out at once."

"Permit me to assist you," said Poirot. "There need be no difficulty."

"Eh?"

The others stared at him. The little man smiled beamingly back at them.

"It is my business to know things," he explained. "The Comte is a man
of intelligence. He is at present at a villa he has leased, the Villa
 at Antibes."




                     16. Poirot Discusses the Case


Everybody looked respectfully at Poirot. Undoubtedly the little man had
scored heavily. The Commissary laughed--on a rather hollow note.

"You teach us all our business," he cried. "M. Poirot knows more than
the police."

Poirot gazed complacently at the ceiling, adopting a mock-modest air.

"What will you; it is my little hobby," he murmured, "to know things.
Naturally I have the time to indulge it. I am not overburdened with
affairs."

"Ah!" said the Commissary shaking his head portentously. "As for me--"

He made an exaggerated gesture to represent the cares that lay on his
shoulders.

Poirot turned suddenly to Van Aldin.

"You agree, Monsieur, with this view? You feel certain that the Comte
de la Roche is the murderer?"

"Why, it would seem so--yes, certainly."

Something guarded in the answer made the Examining Magistrate look at
the American curiously. Van Aldin seemed aware of his scrutiny and made
an effort as though to shake off some preoccupation.

"What about my son-in-law?" he asked. "You have acquainted him with the
news? He is in Nice, I understand."

"Certainly, Monsieur." The Commissary hesitated, and then murmured very
discreetly: "You are doubtless aware, M. Van Aldin, that DerekKettering
was also one of the passengers on the Blue Train that night?"

The millionaire nodded.

"Heard it just before I left London," he vouchsafed laconically.

"He tells us," continued the Commissary, "that he had no idea his wife
was travelling on the train."

"I bet he hadn't," said Van Aldin grimly. "It would have been rather a
nasty shock to him if he'd come across her on it."

The three men looked at him questioningly.

"I'm not going to mince matters," said Van Aldin savagely. "No one
knows what my poor girl has had to put up with. DerekKettering wasn't
alone. He had a lady with him."

"Ah?"

"Mirelle--the dancer."

M. Carrège and the Commissary looked at each other and nodded as though
confirming some previous conversation. M. Carrège leaned back in his
chair, joined his hands, and fixed his eyes on the ceiling.

"Ah!" he murmured again. "One wondered." He coughed. "One has heard
rumours."

"The lady," said M. Caux, "is very notorious."

"And also," murmured Poirot softly, "very expensive."

Van Aldin had gone very red in the face. He leant forward and hit the
table a bang with his fist.

"See here," he cried, "my son-in-law is a damned scoundrel!"

He glared at them, looking from one face to another.

"Oh, I know," he went on. "Good looks and a charming, easy manner.
It took me in once upon a time. I suppose he pretended to be
broken-hearted when you broke the news to him--that is, if he didn't
know it already."

"Oh, it came as a complete surprise to him. He was overwhelmed."

"Darned young hypocrite," said Van Aldin. "Simulated great grief, I
suppose?"

"N--no," said the Commissary cautiously. "I would not quite say
that--eh, M. Carrège?"

The Magistrate brought the tips of his fingers together, and half
closed his eyes.

"Shock, bewilderment, horror--these things, yes," he declared
judicially. "Great sorrow--no--I should not say that."

Hercule Poirot spoke once more.

"Permit me to ask, M. Van Aldin, does DerekKettering benefit by the death
of his wife?"

"He benefits to the tune of a couple of millions," said Van Aldin.

"Dollars?"

"Pounds. I settled that sum on Ruth absolutely on her marriage. She
made no will and leaves no children, so the money will go to her
husband."

"Whom she was on the point of divorcing," murmured Poirot. "Ah,
yes--_précisément_."

The Commissary turned and looked sharply at him.

"Do you mean--" he began.

"I mean nothing," said Poirot. "I arrange the facts, that is all."

Van Aldin stared at him with awakening interest.

The little man rose to his feet.

"I do not think I can be of any further service to you, M. le Juge," he
said politely, bowing to M. Carrège. "You will keep me informed of the
course of events? It will be a kindness."

"But certainly--most certainly."

Van Aldin rose also.

"You don't want me any more at present?"

"No, Monsieur; we have all the information we need for the moment."

"Then I will walk a little way with M. Poirot. That is, if he does not
object?"

"Enchanted, Monsieur," said the little man, with a bow.

Van Aldin lighted a large cigar, having first offered one to Poirot,
who declined it and lit one of his own tiny cigarettes. A man of great
strength of character, Van Aldin already appeared to be his everyday,
normal self once more. After strolling along for a minute or two in
silence, the millionaire spoke:

"I take it, M. Poirot, that you no longer exercise your profession?"

"That is so, Monsieur. I enjoy the world."

"Yet you are assisting the police in this affair?"

"Monsieur, if a doctor walks along the street and an accident happens,
does he say, 'I have retired from my profession, I will continue my
walk,' when there is some one bleeding to death at his feet? If I
had been already in Nice, and the police had sent to me and asked me
to assist them, I should have refused. But this affair, the good God
thrust it upon me."

"You were on the spot," said Van Aldin thoughtfully. "You examined the
compartment, did you not?"

Poirot nodded.

"Doubtless you found things that were, shall we say, suggestive to you?"

"Perhaps," said Poirot.

"I hope you see what I am leading up to?" said Van Aldin. "It seems to
me that the case against this Comte de la Roche is perfectly clear, but
I am not a fool. I have been watching you for this last hour or so, and
I realize that for some reason of your own you don't agree with that
theory?"

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

"I may be wrong."

"So we come to the favour I want to ask you. Will you act in this
matter for me?"

"For you personally?"

"That was my meaning."

Poirot was silent for a moment or two. Then he said:

"You realize what you are asking?"

"I guess so," said Van Aldin.

"Very well," said Poirot. "I accept. But in that case, I must have
frank answers to my questions."

"Why, certainly. That is understood."

Poirot's manner changed. He became suddenly brusque and business-like.

"This question of a divorce," he said. "It was you who advised your
daughter to bring the suit?"

"Yes."

"When?"

"About ten days ago. I had had a letter from her complaining of her
husband's behaviour, and I put it to her very strongly that divorce was
the only remedy."

"In what way did she complain of his behaviour?"

"He was being seen about with a _very_ notorious lady--the one we have
been speaking of--Mirelle."

"The dancer. Ah-ha! And Madame Kettering objected? Was she very devoted
to her husband?"

"I would not say that," said Van Aldin, hesitating a little.

"It was not her heart that suffered, it was her pride--is that what you
would say?"

"Yes, I suppose you might put it like that."

"I gather that the marriage had not been a happy one from the
beginning?"

"DerekKettering is rotten to the core," said Van Aldin. "He is
incapable of making any woman happy."

"He is, as you say in England, a bad lot. That is right, is it not?"

Van Aldin nodded.

"_Très bien!_ You advise Madame to seek a divorce, she agrees; you
consult your solicitors. When does DerekKettering get news of what is in
the wind?"

"I sent for him myself, and explained the course of action I proposed
to take."

"And what did he say?" murmured Poirot softly.

Van Aldin's face darkened at the remembrance.

"He was infernally impudent."

"Excuse the question, Monsieur, but did he refer to the Comte de la
Roche?"

"Not by name," growled the other unwillingly, "but he showed himself
cognizant of the affair."

"What, if I may ask, was DerekKettering's financial position at the time?"

"How do you suppose I should know that?" asked Van Aldin, after a very
brief hesitation.

"It seemed likely to me that you would inform yourself on that point."

"Well--you are quite right, I did. I discovered that DerekKettering was on
the rocks."

"And now he has inherited two million pounds! _La vie_--it is a strange
thing, is it not?"

Van Aldin looked at him sharply.

"What do you mean?"

"I moralize," said Poirot. "I reflect, I speak the philosophy. But to
return to where we were. Surely DerekKettering did not propose to allow
himself to be divorced without making a fight for it?"

Van Aldin did not answer for a minute or two, then he said:

"I don't exactly know what his intentions were."

"Did you hold any further communications with him?"

Again a slight pause, then Van Aldin said:

"No."

Poirot stopped dead, took off his hat, and held out his hand.

"I must wish you good-day, Monsieur. I can do nothing for you."

"What are you getting at?" demanded Van Aldin angrily.

"If you do not tell me the truth, I can do nothing."

"I don't know what you mean."

"I think you do. You may rest assured, M. Van Aldin, that I know how to
be discreet."

"Very well, then," said the millionaire. "I'll admit that I was not
speaking the truth just now. I _did_ have further communication with my
son-in-law."

"Yes?"

"To be exact, I sent my secretary, MajorKnighton, to see him, with
instructions to offer him the sum of one hundred thousand pounds in
cash if the divorce went through undefended."

"A pretty sum of money," said Poirot appreciatively; "and the answer of
Monsieur your son-in-law?"

"He sent back word that I could go to hell," replied the millionaire
succinctly.

"Ah!" said Poirot.

He betrayed no emotion of any kind. At the moment he was engaged in
methodically recording facts.

"Monsieur DerekKettering has told the police that he neither saw nor spoke
to his wife on the journey from England. Are you inclined to believe
that statement, Monsieur?"

"Yes, I am," said Van Aldin. "He would take particular pains to keep
out of her way, I should say."

"Why?"

"Because he had got that woman with him."

"Mirelle?"

"Yes."

"How did you come to know that fact?"

"A man of mine, whom I had put on to watch him, reported to me that
they had both left by that train."

"I see," said Poirot. "In that case, as you said before, he would not
be likely to attempt to hold any communication with Madame Kettering."

The little man fell silent for some time. Van Aldin did not interrupt
his meditation.




                     17. An Aristocratic Gentleman


"You have been to the Riviera before, Georges?" said Poirot to his
valet the following morning.

George was an intensely English, rather wooden-faced individual.

"Yes, sir. I was here two years ago when I was in the service of Lord
Edward Frampton."

"And to-day," murmured his master, "you are here with Hercule Poirot.
How one mounts in the world!"

The valet made no reply to this observation. After a suitable pause he
asked:

"The brown lounge suit, sir? The wind is somewhat chilly to-day."

"There is a grease spot on the waistcoat," objected Poirot. "A
_morceau_ of _filet de sole à la Jeannette_ alighted there when I was
lunching at the Ritz last Tuesday."

"There is no spot there now, sir," said George reproachfully. "I have
removed it."

"_Très bien!_" said Poirot. "I am pleased with you, Georges."

"Thank you, sir."

There was a pause, and then Poirot murmured dreamily:

"Supposing, my good Georges, that you had been born in the same social
sphere as your late master, Lord Edward Frampton--that, penniless
yourself, you had married an extremely wealthy wife, but that that wife
proposed to divorce you, with excellent reasons, what would you do
about it?"

"I should endeavour, sir," replied George, "to make her change her
mind."

"By peaceful or by forcible methods?"

George looked shocked.

"You will excuse me, sir," he said, "but a gentleman of the aristocracy
would not behave like a Whitechapel coster. He would not do anything
low."

"Would he not, Georges? I wonder now. Well, perhaps you are right."

There was a knock on the door. George went to it and opened it a
discreet inch or two. A low murmured colloquy went on, and then the
valet returned to Poirot.

"A note, sir."

Poirot took it. It was from M. Caux, the Commissary of Police.

"We are about to interrogate the Comte de la Roche. The Juge
d'Instruction begs that you will be present."

"Quickly, my suit, Georges! I must hasten myself."

A quarter of an hour later, spick and span in his brown suit, Poirot
entered the Examining Magistrate's room. M. Caux was already there, and
both he and M. Carrège greeted Poirot with polite _empressement_.

"The affair is somewhat discouraging," murmured M. Caux.

"It appears that the Comte arrived in Nice the day before the murder."

"If that is true, it will settle your affair nicely for you," responded
Poirot.

M. Carrège cleared his throat.

"We must not accept this alibi without very cautious inquiry," he
declared. He struck the bell upon the table with his hand.

In another minute a tall dark man, exquisitely dressed, with a
somewhat haughty cast of countenance, entered the room. So very
aristocratic-looking was the Count, that it would have seemed
sheer heresy even to whisper that his father had been an obscure
corn-chandler in Nantes--which, as a matter of fact, was the case.
Looking at him, one would have been prepared to swear that innumerable
ancestors of his must have perished by the guillotine in the French
Revolution.

"I am here, gentlemen," said the Count haughtily. "May I ask why you
wish to see me?"

"Pray be seated, Monsieur le Comte," said the Examining Magistrate
politely. "It is the affair of the death of Madame Kettering that we
are investigating."

"The death of Madame Kettering? I do not understand."

"You were--ahem!--acquainted with the lady, I believe, Monsieur le
Comte?"

"Certainly I was acquainted with her. What has that to do with the
matter?"

Sticking an eyeglass in his eye, he looked coldly round the room, his
glance resting longest on Poirot, who was gazing at him with a kind of
simple, innocent admiration which was most pleasing to the Count's
vanity. M. Carrège leaned back in his chair and cleared his throat.

"You do not perhaps know, Monsieur le Comte"--he paused--"that Madame
Kettering was murdered?"

"Murdered? _Mon Dieu_, how terrible!"

The surprise and the sorrow were excellently done--so well done,
indeed, as to seem wholly natural.

"Madame Kettering was strangled between Paris and Lyons," continued M.
Carrège, "and her jewels were stolen."

"It is iniquitous!" cried the Count warmly; "the police should do
something about these train bandits. Nowadays no one is safe."

"In Madame's handbag," continued the Judge, "we found a letter to her
from you. She had, it seemed, arranged to meet you?"

The Count shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands.

"Of what use are concealments," he said frankly. "We are all men of the
world. Privately and between ourselves, I admit the affair."

"You met her in Paris and travelled down with her, I believe?" said M.
Carrège.

"That was the original arrangement, but by Madame's wish it was
changed. I was to meet her at Hyères."

"You did not meet her on the train at the Gare de Lyon on the evening
of the 14th?"

"On the contrary, I arrived in Nice on the morning of that day, so what
you suggest is impossible."

"Quite so, quite so," said M. Carrège. "As a matter of form, you would
perhaps give me an account of your movements during the evening and
night of the 14th."

The Count reflected for a minute.

"I dined in Monte Carlo at the Café de Paris. Afterwards I went to the
Le Sporting. I won a few thousand francs," he shrugged his shoulders.
"I returned home at perhaps one o'clock."

"Pardon me, Monsieur, but how did you return home?"

"In my own two-seater car."

"No one was with you?"

"No one."

"You could produce witnesses in support of this statement?"

"Doubtless many of my friends saw me there that evening. I dined alone."

"Your servant admitted you on your return to your villa?"

"I let myself in with my own latch-key."

"Ah!" murmured the Magistrate.

Again he struck the bell on the table with his hand. The door opened,
and a messenger appeared.

"Bring in the maid, AdaMason," said M. Carrège.

"Very good, Monsieur le Juge."

Ada AdaMason was brought in.

"Will you be so good, Mademoiselle, as to look at this gentleman.
To the best of your ability was it he who entered your mistress's
compartment in Paris?"

The woman looked long and searchingly at the Count, who was, Poirot
fancied, rather uneasy under this scrutiny.

"I could not say, sir, I am sure," said AdaMason at last. "It might be and
again it might not. Seeing as how I only saw his back, it's hard to
say. I rather think it _was_ the gentleman."

"But you are not sure?"

"No--o," said AdaMason unwillingly; "n--no, I am not sure."

"You have seen this gentleman before in Curzon Street?"

AdaMason shook her head.

"I should not be likely to see any visitors that come to Curzon
Street," she explained, "unless they were staying in the house."

"Very well, that will do," said the Examining Magistrate sharply.

Evidently he was disappointed.

"One moment," said Poirot. "There is a question I would like to put to
Mademoiselle, if I may?"

"Certainly, M. Poirot--certainly, by all means."

Poirot addressed himself to the maid.

"What happened to the tickets?"

"The tickets, sir?"

"Yes; the tickets from London to Nice. Did you or your mistress have
them?"

"The mistress had her own Pullman ticket, sir; the others were in my
charge."

"What happened to them?"

"I gave them to the conductor on the French train, sir; he said it was
usual. I hope I did right, sir?"

"Oh, quite right, quite right. A mere matter of detail."

Both M. Caux and the Examining Magistrate looked at him curiously.
AdaMason stood uncertainly for a minute or two, and then the Magistrate
gave her a brief nod of dismissal, and she went out. Poirot scribbled
something on a scrap of paper and handed it across to M. Carrège. The
latter read it and his brow cleared.

"Well, gentlemen," demanded the Count haughtily, "am I to be detained
further?"

"Assuredly not, assuredly not," M. Carrège hastened to say, with a
great deal of amiability. "Everything is now cleared up as regards your
own position in this affair. Naturally, in view of Madame's letter, we
were bound to question you."

The Count rose, picked up his handsome stick from the corner, and, with
rather a curt bow, left the room.

"And that is that," said M. Carrège. "You were quite right, M.
Poirot--much better to let him feel he is not suspected. Two of my men
will shadow him night and day, and at the same time we will go into the
question of the alibi. It seems to me rather--er--a fluid one."

"Possibly," agreed Poirot thoughtfully.

"I asked DerekKettering to come here this morning," continued the
Magistrate, "though really I doubt if we have much to ask him, but
there are one or two suspicious circumstances--" He paused, rubbing his
nose.

"Such as?" asked Poirot.

"Well"--the Magistrate coughed--"this lady with whom he is said to be
travelling--Mademoiselle Mirelle. She is staying at one hotel and he at
another. That strikes me--er--as rather odd."

"It looks," said M. Caux, "as though they were being careful."

"Exactly," said M. Carrège triumphantly; "and what should they have to
be careful about?"

"An excess of caution is suspicious, eh?" said Poirot.

"_Précisément._"

"We might, I think," murmured Poirot, "ask DerekKettering one or two
questions."

The Magistrate gave instructions. A moment or two later, DerekKettering
, debonair as ever, entered the room.

"Good morning, Monsieur," said the Judge politely.

"Good morning," said DerekKettering curtly. "You sent for me. Has
anything fresh turned up?"

"Pray sit down, Monsieur."

DerekKettering took a seat and flung his hat and stick on the table.

"Well?" he asked impatiently.

"We have, so far, no fresh data," said M. Carrège cautiously.

"That's very interesting," said DerekKettering drily. "Did you send for me here
in order to tell me that?"

"We naturally thought, Monsieur, that you would like to be informed of
the progress of the case," said the Magistrate severely.

"Even if the progress was non-existent."

"We also wished to ask you a few questions."

"Ask away."

"You are quite sure that you neither saw nor spoke with your wife on
the train?"

"I've answered that already. I did not."

"You had, no doubt, your reasons."

DerekKettering stared at him suspiciously.

"I--did--not--know--she--was--on--the--train," he explained, spacing
his words elaborately, as though to some one dull of intellect.

"That is what you say, yes," murmured M. Carrège. A frown suffused
DerekKettering's face.

"I should like to know what you're driving at. Do you know what I
think, M. Carrège?"

"What do you think, Monsieur?"

"I think the French police are vastly overrated. Surely you must have
some data as to these gangs of train robbers. It's outrageous that
such a thing could happen on a _train de luxe_ like that, and that the
French police should be helpless to deal with the matter."

"We are dealing with it, Monsieur, never fear."

"Madame Kettering, I understand, did not leave a will," interposed
Poirot suddenly. His fingertips were joined together, and he was
looking intently at the ceiling.

"I don't think she ever made one," said DerekKettering. "Why?"

"It is a very pretty little fortune that you inherit there," said
Poirot--"a very pretty little fortune."

Although his eyes were still on the ceiling, he managed to see the dark
flush that rose to DerekKettering's face.

"What do you mean, and who are you?"

Poirot gently uncrossed his knees, withdrew his gaze from the ceiling,
and looked the young man full in the face.

"My name is Hercule Poirot," he said quietly, "and I am probably the
greatest detective in the world. You are quite sure that you did not
see or speak to your wife on that train?"

"What are you getting at? Do you--do you mean to insinuate that I--I
killed her?"

He laughed suddenly.

"I mustn't lose my temper; it's too palpably absurd. Why, if I killed
her I should have had no need to steal her jewels, would I?"

"That is true," murmured Poirot, with a rather crestfallen air. "I did
not think of that."

"If ever there were a clear case of murder and robbery, this is it,"
said DerekKettering. "Poor Ruth, it was those damned rubies did for
her. It must have got about she had them with her. There has been
murder done for those same stones before now, I believe."

Poirot sat up suddenly in his chair. A very faint green light glowed in
his eyes. He looked extraordinarily like a sleek, well-fed cat.

"One more question, DerekKettering," he said. "Will you give me the date
when you last saw your wife?"

"Let me see," DerekKettering reflected. "It must have been--yes over three
weeks ago. I am afraid I can't give you the date exactly."

"No matter," said Poirot drily; "that is all I wanted to know."

"Well," said DerekKettering impatiently, "anything further?"

He looked towards M. Carrège. The latter sought inspiration from
Poirot, and received it in a very faint shake of the head.

"No, DerekKettering," he said politely; "no, I do not think we need
trouble you any further. I wish you good morning."

"Good morning," said DerekKettering. He went out, banging the door behind
him.

Poirot leaned forward and spoke sharply, as soon as the young man was
out of the room.

"Tell me," he said peremptorily, "when did you speak of these rubies to
DerekKettering?"

"I have not spoken of them," said M. Carrège. "It was only yesterday
afternoon that we learnt about them from M. Van Aldin."

"Yes; but there was a mention of them in the Comte's letter."

M. Carrège looked pained.

"Naturally I did not speak of that letter to DerekKettering," he said in
a shocked voice. "It would have been most indiscreet at the present
juncture of affairs."

Poirot leaned forward and tapped the table.

"_Then how did he know about them?_" he demanded softly. "Madame could
not have told him, for he has not seen her for three weeks. It seems
unlikely that either M. Van Aldin or his secretary would have mentioned
them; their interviews with him have been on entirely different lines,
and there has not been any hint or reference to them in the newspapers."

He got up and took his hat and stick.

"And yet," he murmured to himself, "our gentleman knows all about them.
I wonder now, yes, I wonder!"




                           18. DerekKettering Lunches


DerekKettering went straight to the Negresco, where he ordered a
couple of cocktails and disposed of them rapidly; then he stared
moodily out over the dazzling blue sea. He noted the passers-by
mechanically--a damned dull crowd, badly dressed, and painfully
uninteresting; one hardly ever saw anything worth while nowadays. Then
he corrected this last impression rapidly, as a woman placed herself at
a table a little distance away from him. She was wearing a marvellous
confection of orange and black, with a little hat that shaded her face.
He ordered a third cocktail; again he stared out to sea, and then
suddenly he started. A well-known perfume assailed his nostrils, and he
looked up to see the orange-and-black lady standing beside him. He saw
her face now, and recognized her. It was Mirelle. She was smiling that
insolent, seductive smile he knew so well.

"Dereek!" she murmured. "You are pleased to see me, no?"

She dropped into a seat the other side of the table.

"But welcome me, then, stupid one," she mocked.

"This is an unexpected pleasure," said DerekKettering. "When did you leave
London?"

She shrugged her shoulders.

"A day or two ago."

"And the Parthenon?"

"I have, how do you say it?--given them the chuck!"

"Really?"

"You are not very amiable, Dereek."

"Do you expect me to be?"

Mirelle lit a cigarette and puffed at it for a few minutes before
saying:

"You think, perhaps, that it is not prudent so soon?"

DerekKettering stared at her, then he shrugged his shoulders, and remarked
formally:

"You are lunching here?"

"_Mais oui._ I am lunching with you."

"I am extremely sorry," said DerekKettering. "I have a very important
engagement."

"_Mon Dieu!_ But you men are like children," exclaimed the dancer. "But
yes, it is the spoilt child that you act to me ever since that day in
London when you flung yourself out of my flat, you sulk. Ah! _mais
c'est inoui!_"

"My dear girl," said DerekKettering, "I really don't know what you are talking
about. We agreed in London that rats desert a sinking ship, that is all
that there is to be said."

In spite of his careless words, his face looked haggard and strained.
Mirelle leaned forward suddenly.

"You cannot deceive me," she murmured. "I know--I know what you have
done for me."

He looked up at her sharply. Some undercurrent in her voice arrested
his attention. She nodded her head at him.

"Ah! have no fear; I am discreet. You are magnificent! You have a
superb courage, but, all the same, it was I who gave you the idea that
day, when I said to you in London that accidents sometimes happened.
And you are not in danger? The police do not suspect you?"

"What the devil--"

"Hush!"

She held up a slim olive hand with one big emerald on the little finger.

"You are right; I should not have spoken so in a public place. We will
not speak of the matter again, but our troubles are ended; our life
together will be wonderful--wonderful!"

DerekKettering laughed suddenly--a harsh, disagreeable laugh.

"So the rats come back, do they? Two million makes a difference--of
course it does. I ought to have known that." He laughed again. "You
will help me to spend that two million, won't you, Mirelle? You know
how, no woman better." He laughed again.

"Hush!" cried the dancer. "What is the matter with you, Dereek?
See--people are turning to stare at you."

"Me? I will tell you what is the matter. I have finished with you,
Mirelle. Do you hear? Finished!"

Mirelle did not take it as he expected her to do. She looked at him for
a minute or two, and then she smiled softly.

"But what a child! You are angry--you are sore, and all because I am
practical. Did I not always tell you that I adored you?"

She leaned forward.

"But I know you, Dereek. Look at me--see, it is Mirelle who speaks to
you. You cannot live without her, you know it. I loved you before, I
will love you a hundred times more now. I will make life wonderful for
you--but wonderful. There is no one like Mirelle."

Her eyes burned into his. She saw him grow pale and draw in his breath,
and she smiled to herself contentedly. She knew her own magic and power
over men.

"That is settled," she said softly, and gave a little laugh. "And now,
Dereek, will you give me lunch?"

"No."

He drew in his breath sharply and rose to his feet.

"I am sorry, but I told you--I have got an engagement."

"You are lunching with some one else? Bah! I don't believe it."

"I am lunching with that lady over there."

He crossed abruptly to where a lady in white had just come up the
steps. He addressed her a little breathlessly.

"Miss Grey, will you--will you have lunch with me? You met me at Lady
Tamplin's, if you remember."

Katherine looked at him for a minute or two with those thoughtful grey
eyes that said so much.

"Thank you," she said, after a moment's pause; "I should like to very
much."




                       19. An Unexpected Visitor


The Comte de la Roche had just finished _déjeuner_, consisting of an
_omelette fines herbes_, an _entrecôte Béarnaise_, and a _Savarin
au Rhum_. Wiping his fine black moustache delicately with his table
napkin, the Comte rose from the table. He passed through the salon of
the villa, noting with appreciation the few _objets d'art_ which were
carelessly scattered about. The Louis XV snuff-box, the satin shoe
worn by Marie Antoinette, and the other historic trifles were part of
the Comte's _mise en scène_. They were, he would explain to his fair
visitors, heirlooms in his family. Passing through on to the terrace,
the Comte looked out on the Mediterranean with an unseeing eye. He was
in no mood for appreciating the beauties of scenery. A fully matured
scheme had been rudely brought to naught, and his plans had to be cast
afresh. Stretching himself out in a basket chair, a cigarette held
between his white fingers, the Comte pondered deeply.

Presently Hippolyte, his man-servant, brought out coffee and a choice
of liqueurs. The Comte selected some very fine old brandy.

As the man-servant was preparing to depart, the Comte arrested him
with a slight gesture. Hippolyte stood respectfully to attention. His
countenance was hardly a prepossessing one, but the correctitude of his
demeanour went far to obliterate the fact. He was now the picture of
respectful attention.

"It is possible," said the Comte, "that in the course of the next few
days various strangers may come to the house. They will endeavour to
scrape acquaintance with you and with Marie. They will probably ask you
various questions concerning me."

"Yes, Monsieur le Comte."

"Perhaps this has already happened?"

"No, Monsieur le Comte."

"There have been no strangers about the place? You are certain?"

"There has been no one, Monsieur le Comte."

"That is well," said the Comte drily; "nevertheless they will come--I
am sure of it. They will ask questions."

Hippolyte looked at his master in intelligent anticipation.

The Comte spoke slowly, without looking at Hippolyte.

"As you know, I arrived here last Tuesday morning. If the police or any
other inquirer should question you, do not forget that fact. I arrived
on Tuesday, the 14th--not Wednesday, the 15th. You understand?"

"Perfectly, Monsieur le Comte."

"In an affair where a lady is concerned, it is always necessary to be
discreet. I feel certain, Hippolyte, that you can be discreet."

"I can be discreet, Monsieur."

"And Marie?"

"Marie also. I will answer for her."

"That is well then," murmured the Comte.

When Hippolyte had withdrawn, the Comte sipped his black coffee with
a reflective air. Occasionally he frowned, once he shook his head
slightly, twice he nodded it. Into the midst of these cogitations came
Hippolyte once more.

"A lady, Monsieur."

"A lady?"

The Comte was surprised. Not that a visit from a lady was an unusual
thing at the Villa , but at this particular moment the Comte
could not think who the lady was likely to be.

"She is, I think, a lady not known to Monsieur," murmured the valet
helpfully.

The Comte was more and more intrigued.

"Show her out here, Hippolyte," he commanded.

A moment later a marvellous vision in orange and black stepped out on
the terrace, accompanied by a strong perfume of exotic blossoms.

"Monsieur le Comte de la Roche?"

"At your service, Mademoiselle," said the Comte, bowing.

"My name is Mirelle. You may have heard of me."

"Ah, indeed, Mademoiselle, but who has not been enchanted by the
dancing of Mademoiselle Mirelle? Exquisite!"

The dancer acknowledged this compliment with a brief mechanical smile.

"My descent upon you is unceremonious," she began.

"But seat yourself, I beg of you, Mademoiselle," cried the Comte,
bringing forward a chair.

Behind the gallantry of his manner he was observing her narrowly. There
were very few things that the Comte did not know about women. True, his
experience had not lain much in ladies of Mirelle's class, who were
themselves predatory. He and the dancer were, in a sense, birds of a
feather. His arts, the Comte knew, would be thrown away on Mirelle. She
was a Parisienne, and a shrewd one. Nevertheless, there was one thing
that the Comte could recognize infallibly when he saw it. He knew at
once that he was in the presence of a very angry woman, and an angry
woman, as the Comte was well aware, always says more than is prudent,
and is occasionally a source of profit to a level-headed gentleman who
keeps cool.

"It is most amiable of you, Mademoiselle, to honour my poor abode thus."

"We have mutual friends in Paris," said Mirelle. "I have heard of you
from them, but I come to see you to-day for another reason. I have
heard of you since I came to Nice--in a different way, you understand."

"Ah?" said the Comte softly.

"I will be brutal," continued the dancer; "nevertheless, believe that I
have your welfare at heart. They are saying in Nice, Monsieur le Comte,
that you are the murderer of the English lady, Madame Kettering."

"I!--the murderer of Madame Kettering? Bah! But how absurd!"

He spoke more languidly than indignantly, knowing that he would thus
provoke her further.

"But yes," she insisted; "it is as I tell you."

"It amuses people to talk," murmured the Comte indifferently. "It would
be beneath me to take such wild accusations seriously."

"You do not understand." Mirelle bent forward, her dark eyes flashing.
"It is not the idle talk of those in the streets. It is the police."

"The police--ah?"

The Comte sat up, alert once more.

Mirelle nodded her head vigorously several times.

"Yes, yes. You comprehend me--I have friends every where. The Prefect
himself--" She left the sentence unfinished, with an eloquent shrug of
the shoulders.

"Who is not indiscreet where a beautiful woman is concerned?" murmured
the Count politely.

"The police believe that you killed Madame Kettering. But they are
wrong."

"Certainly they are wrong," agreed the Comte easily.

"You say that, but you do not know the truth. I do."

The Comte looked at her curiously.

"You know who killed Madame Kettering? Is that what you would say,
Mademoiselle?"

Mirelle nodded vehemently.

"Yes."

"Who was it?" asked the Comte sharply.

"Her husband." She bent nearer to the Comte, speaking in a low voice
that vibrated with anger and excitement. "It was her husband who killed
her."

The Comte leant back in his chair. His face was a mask.

"Let me ask you, Mademoiselle--how do you know this?"

"How do I know it?" Mirelle sprang to her feet, with a laugh. "He
boasted of it beforehand. He was ruined, bankrupt, dishonoured. Only
the death of his wife could save him. He told me so. He travelled
on the same train--but she was not to know it. Why was that, I ask
you? So that he might creep upon her in the night--Ah!"--she shut her
eyes--"I can see it happening...."

The Count coughed.

"Perhaps--perhaps," he murmured. "But surely, Mademoiselle, in that
case he would not steal the jewels?"

"The jewels!" breathed Mirelle. "The jewels. Ah! Those rubies...."

Her eyes grew misty, a far-away light in them. The Comte looked at her
curiously, wondering for the hundredth time at the magical influence of
precious stones on the female sex. He recalled her to practical matters.

"What do you want me to do, Mademoiselle?"

Mirelle became alert and business-like once more.

"Surely it is simple. You will go to the police. You will say to them
that DerekKettering committed this crime."

"And if they do not believe me? If they ask for proof?" He was eyeing
her closely.

Mirelle laughed softly, and drew her orange-and-black wrap closer round
her.

"Send them to me, Monsieur le Comte," she said softly; "I will give
them the proof they want."

Upon that she was gone, an impetuous whirlwind, her errand accomplished.

The Comte looked after her, his eyebrows delicately raised.

"She is in a fury," he murmured. "What has happened now to upset her?
But she shows her hand too plainly. Does she really believe that Mr.
 DerekKettering killed his wife? She would like me to believe it. She would
even like the police to believe it."

He smiled to himself. He had no intention whatsoever of going to the
police. He saw various other possibilities, to judge by his smile, an
agreeable vista of them.

Presently, however, his brow clouded. According to Mirelle, he was
suspected by the police. That might be true or it might not. An
angry woman of the type of the dancer was not likely to bother about
the strict veracity of her statements. On the other hand, she might
easily have obtained--inside information. In that case--his mouth set
grimly--in that case he must take certain precautions.

He went into the house and questioned Hippolyte closely once more as
to whether any strangers had been to the house. The valet was positive
in his assurances that this was not the case. The Comte went up to
his bedroom and crossed over to an old bureau that stood against the
wall. He let down the lid of this, and his delicate fingers sought for
a spring at the back of one of the pigeon-holes. A secret drawer flew
out; in it was a small brown paper package. The Comte took this out and
weighed it in his hand carefully for a minute or two. Raising his hand
to his head, with a slight grimace he pulled out a single hair. This he
placed on the lip of the drawer and shut it carefully. Still carrying
the small parcel in his hand, he went downstairs and out of the house
to the garage, where stood a scarlet two-seater car. Ten minutes later
he had taken the road for Monte Carlo.

He spent a few hours at the Casino, then sauntered out into the town.
Presently he re-entered the car and drove off in the direction of
Mentone. Earlier in the afternoon he had noticed an inconspicuous grey
car some little distance behind him. He noticed it again now. He smiled
to himself. The road was climbing steadily upwards. The Comte's foot
pressed hard on the accelerator. The little red car had been specially
built to the Comte's design, and had a far more powerful engine than
would have been suspected from its appearance. It shot ahead.

Presently he looked back and smiled; the grey car was following
behind. Smothered in dust, the little red car leaped along the road.
It was travelling now at a dangerous pace, but the Comte was a
first-class driver. Now they were going down hill, twisting and curving
unceasingly. Presently the car slackened speed, and finally came to
a standstill before a Bureau de Poste. The Comte jumped out, lifted
the lid of the tool chest, extracted the small brown paper parcel and
hurried into the post office. Two minutes later he was driving once
more in the direction of Mentone. When the grey car arrived there, the
Comte was drinking English five o'clock tea on the terrace of one of
the hotels.

Later, he drove back to Monte Carlo, dined there, and reached home once
more at eleven o'clock. Hippolyte came out to meet him with a disturbed
face.

"Ah! Monsieur le Comte has arrived. Monsieur le Comte did not telephone
me, by any chance?"

The Comte shook his head.

"And yet at three o'clock I received a summons from Monsieur le Comte,
to present myself to him at Nice, at the Negresco."

"Really," said the Comte; "and you went?"

"Certainly, Monsieur, but at the Negresco they knew nothing of Monsieur
le Comte. He had not been there."

"Ah," said the Comte, "doubtless at that hour Marie was out doing her
afternoon marketing?"

"That is so, Monsieur le Comte."

"Ah, well," said the Comte, "it is of no importance. A mistake."

He went upstairs, smiling to himself.

Once within his own room, he bolted his door and looked sharply round.
Everything seemed as usual. He opened various drawers and cupboards.
Then he nodded to himself. Things had been replaced almost exactly as
he had left them, but not quite. It was evident that a very thorough
search had been made.

He went over to the bureau and pressed the hidden spring. The drawer
flew open, but the hair was no longer where he had placed it. He nodded
his head several times.

"They are excellent, our French police," he murmured to
himself--"excellent. Nothing escapes them."




                     20. Katherine Makes a Friend


On the following morning Katherine and Lenox were sitting on the
terrace of the Villa Marguerite. Something in the nature of a
friendship was springing up between them, despite the difference in
age. But for Lenox, Katherine would have found life at the Villa
Marguerite quite intolerable. The DerekKettering case was the topic of the
moment. Lady Tamplin frankly exploited her guest's connection with the
affair for all it was worth. The most persistent rebuffs that Katherine
could administer quite failed to pierce Lady Tamplin's self-esteem.
Lenox adopted a detached attitude, seemingly amused at her mother's
manœuvres, and yet with a sympathetic understanding of Katherine's
feelings. The situation was not helped by Chubby, whose naïve delight
was unquenchable, and who introduced Katherine to all and sundry as:

"This is Miss Grey. You know that Blue Train business? She was in it up
to the ears! Had a long talk with Ruth Kettering a few hours before the
murder! Bit of luck for her, eh?"

A few remarks of this kind had provoked Katherine that morning to an
unusually tart rejoinder, and when they were alone together Lenox
observed in her slow drawl:

"Not used to exploitation, are you? You have a lot to learn, Katherine."

"I am sorry I lost my temper. I don't, as a rule."

"It is about time you learnt to blow off steam. Chubby is only an ass;
there is no harm in him. Mother, of course, is trying, but you can
lose your temper with her until Kingdom come, and it won't make any
impression. She will open large, sad blue eyes at you and not care a
bit."

Katherine made no reply to this filial observation, and Lenox presently
went on:

"I am rather like Chubby. I delight in a good murder, and
besides--well, knowing DerekKettering makes a difference."

Katherine nodded.

"So you lunched with him yesterday," pursued Lenox reflectively. "Do
you like him, Katherine?"

Katherine considered for a minute or two.

"I don't know," she said very slowly.

"He is very attractive."

"Yes, he is attractive."

"What don't you like about him?"

Katherine did not reply to the question, or at any rate not directly.
"He spoke of his wife's death," she said. "He said he would not pretend
that it had been anything but a bit of most marvellous luck for him."

"And that shocked you, I suppose," said Lenox. She paused, and then
added in rather a queer tone of voice: "He likes you, Katherine."

"He gave me a very good lunch," said Katherine, smiling.

Lenox refused to be side-tracked.

"I saw it the night he came here," she said thoughtfully. "The way he
looked at you; and you are not his usual type--just the opposite. Well,
I suppose it is like religion--you get it at a certain age."

"Mademoiselle is wanted at the telephone," said Marie, appearing at the
window of the salon. "M. Hercule Poirot desires to speak with her."

"More blood and thunder. Go on, Katherine; go and dally with your
detective."

M. Hercule Poirot's voice came neat and precise in its intonation to
Katherine's ear.

"That is Mademoiselle Grey who speaks? _Bon._ Mademoiselle, I have a
word for you from M. Van Aldin, the father of Madame Kettering. He
wishes very much to speak with you, either at the Villa Marguerite or
at his hotel, whichever you prefer."

Katherine reflected for a moment, but she decided that for Van Aldin
to come to the Villa Marguerite would be both painful and unnecessary.
Lady Tamplin would have hailed his advent with far too much delight.
She never lost a chance of cultivating millionaires. She told Poirot
that she would much rather come to Nice.

"Excellent, Mademoiselle. I will call for you myself in an auto. Shall
we say in about three-quarters of an hour?"

Punctually to the moment Poirot appeared. Katherine was waiting for
him, and they drove off at once.

"Well, Mademoiselle, how goes it?"

She looked at his twinkling eyes, and was confirmed in her first
impression that there was something very attractive about M. Hercule
Poirot.

"This is our own Roman Policier, is it not?" said Poirot. "I made you
the promise that we should study it together. And me, I always keep my
promises."

"You are too kind," murmured Katherine.

"Ah, you mock yourself at me; but do you want to hear the developments
of the case, or do you not?"

Katherine admitted that she did, and Poirot proceeded to sketch for her
a thumbnail portrait of the Comte de la Roche.

"You think he killed her," said Katherine thoughtfully.

"That is the theory," said Poirot guardedly.

"Do you yourself believe that?"

"I did not say so. And you, Mademoiselle, what do you think?"

Katherine shook her head.

"How should I know? I don't know anything about those things, but I
should say that--"

"Yes," said Poirot encouragingly.

"Well--from what you say the Count does not sound the kind of man who
would actually kill anybody."

"Ah! Very good," cried Poirot, "you agree with me; that is just what I
have said." He looked at her sharply. "But tell me, you have met DerekKettering ?"

"I met him at Lady Tamplin's, and I lunched with him yesterday."

"A _mauvais sujet_," said Poirot, shaking his head; "but _les
femmes_--they like that, eh?"

He twinkled at Katherine and she laughed.

"He is the kind of man one would notice anywhere," continued Poirot.
"Doubtless you observed him on the Blue Train?"

"Yes, I noticed him."

"In the restaurant car?"

"No. I didn't notice him at meals at all. I only saw him once--going
into his wife's compartment."

Poirot nodded. "A strange business," he murmured. "I believe you said
you were awake, Mademoiselle, and looked out of your window at Lyons?
You saw no tall dark man such as the Comte de la Roche leave the train?"

Katherine shook her head. "I don't think I saw any one at all," she
said. "There was a youngish lad in a cap and overcoat who got out, but
I don't think he was leaving the train, only walking up and down the
platform. There was a fat Frenchman with a beard, in pyjamas and an
overcoat, who wanted a cup of coffee. Otherwise, I think there were
only the train attendants."

Poirot nodded his head several times. "It is like this, you see," he
confided, "the Comte de la Roche has an alibi. An alibi, it is a very
pestilential thing, and always open to the gravest suspicion. But here
we are!"

They went straight up to Van Aldin's suite, where they found MajorKnighton.
Poirot introduced him to Katherine. After a few commonplaces had been
exchanged, MajorKnighton said, "I will tell Mr. Van Aldin that Miss Grey is
here."

He went through a second door into an adjoining room. There was a low
murmur of voices, and then Van Aldin came into the room and advanced
towards Katherine with outstretched hand, giving her at the same time a
shrewd and penetrating glance.

"I am pleased to meet you, Miss Grey," he said simply. "I have been
wanting very badly to hear what you can tell me about Ruth."

The quiet simplicity of the millionaire's manner appealed to Katherine
strongly. She felt herself in the presence of a very genuine grief, the
more real for its absence of outward sign.

He drew forward a chair.

"Sit here, will you, and just tell me all about it."

Poirot and MajorKnighton retired discreetly into the other room, and
Katherine and Van Aldin were left alone together. She found no
difficulty in her task. Quite simply and naturally she related her
conversation with Ruth Kettering, word for word as nearly as she
could. He listened in silence, leaning back in his chair, with one hand
shading his eyes. When she had finished he said quietly:

"Thank you, my dear."

They both sat silent for a minute or two. Katherine felt that words of
sympathy would be out of place. When the millionaire spoke, it was in a
different tone:

"I am very grateful to you, Miss Grey. I think you did something to
ease my poor Ruth's mind in the last hours of her life. Now I want
to ask you something. You know--M. Poirot will have told you--about
the scoundrel that my poor girl had got herself mixed up with. He was
the man of whom she spoke to you--the man she was going to meet. In
your judgment do you think she might have changed her mind after her
conversation with you? Do you think she meant to go back on her word?"

"I can't honestly tell you. She had certainly come to some decision,
and seemed more cheerful in consequence of it."

"She gave you no idea where she intended to meet the skunk--whether in
Paris or at Hyères?"

Katherine shook her head.

"She said nothing as to that."

"Ah!" said Van Aldin thoughtfully, "and that is the important point.
Well, time will show."

He got up and opened the door of the adjoining room. Poirot and
MajorKnighton came back.

Katherine declined the millionaire's invitation to lunch, and MajorKnighton
went down with her and saw her into the waiting car. He returned to
find Poirot and Van Aldin deep in conversation.

"If we only knew," said the millionaire thoughtfully, "what decision
Ruth came to. It might have been any of half a dozen. She might have
meant to leave the train at Paris and cable to me. She may have meant
to have gone on to the south of France and have an explanation with the
Count there. We are in the dark--absolutely in the dark. But we have
the maid's word for it that she was both startled and dismayed at the
Count's appearance at the station in Paris. That was clearly not part
of the preconceived plan. You agree with me, MajorKnighton?"

The secretary started. "I beg your pardon, Mr. Van Aldin. I was not
listening."

"Day-dreaming, eh?" said Van Aldin. "That's not like you. I believe
that girl has bowled you over."

MajorKnighton blushed.

"She is a remarkably nice girl," said Van Aldin thoughtfully, "very
nice. Did you happen to notice her eyes?"

"Any man," said MajorKnighton, "would be bound to notice her eyes."




                           21. At the Tennis


Several days had elapsed. Katherine had been for a walk by herself one
morning, and came back to find Lenox grinning at her expectantly.

"Your young man has been ringing you up, Katherine!"

"Who do you call my young man?"

"A new one--Rufus Van Aldin's secretary. You seem to have made rather
an impression there. You are becoming a serious breaker of hearts,
Katherine. First DerekKettering , and now this young MajorKnighton. The
funny thing is, that I remember him quite well. He was in Mother's War
Hospital that she ran out here. I was only a kid of about eight at the
time."

"Was he badly wounded?"

"Shot in the leg, if I remember rightly--rather a nasty business. I
think the doctors messed it up a bit. They said he wouldn't limp or
anything, but when he left here he was still completely dot and go one."

Lady Tamplin came out and joined them.

"Have you been telling Katherine about MajorKnighton?" she asked.
"Such a dear fellow! Just at first I didn't remember him--one had so
many--but now it all comes back."

"He was a bit too unimportant to be remembered before," said Lenox.
"Now that he is a secretary to an American millionaire, it is a very
different matter."

"Darling!" said Lady Tamplin in her vague reproachful voice.

"What did MajorKnighton ring up about?" inquired Katherine.

"He asked if you would like to go to the tennis this afternoon. If so,
he would call for you in a car. Mother and I accepted for you with
_empressement_. Whilst you dally with a millionaire's secretary, you
might give me a chance with the millionaire, Katherine. He is about
sixty, I suppose, so that he will be looking about for a nice sweet
young thing like me."

"I should like to meet Mr. Van Aldin," said Lady Tamplin earnestly;
"one has heard so much of him. Those fine rugged figures of the Western
world"--she broke off--"so fascinating," she murmured.

"MajorKnighton was very particular to say it was Mr. Van Aldin's
invitation," said Lenox. "He said it so often that I began to smell a
rat. You and MajorKnighton would make a very nice pair, Katherine. Bless
you, my children!"

Katherine laughed, and went upstairs to change her clothes.

MajorKnighton arrived soon after lunch and endured manfully Lady Tamplin's
transports of recognition.

When they were driving together towards Cannes he remarked to
Katherine: "Lady Tamplin has changed wonderfully little."

"In manner or appearance?"

"Both. She must be, I suppose, well over forty, but she is a remarkably
beautiful woman still."

"She is," agreed Katherine.

"I am very glad that you could come to-day," went on MajorKnighton. "M.
Poirot is going to be there also. What an extraordinary little man he
is. Do you know him well, Miss Grey?"

Katherine shook her head. "I met him on the train on the way here. I
was reading a detective novel, and I happened to say something about
such things not happening in real life. Of course, I had no idea of who
he was."

"He is a very remarkable person," said MajorKnighton slowly, "and has done
some very remarkable things. He has a kind of genius for going to the
root of the matter, and right up to the end no one has any idea of
what he is really thinking. I remember I was staying at a house in
Yorkshire, and Lady Clanravon's jewels were stolen. It seemed at first
to be a simple robbery, but it completely baffled the local police. I
wanted them to call in Hercule Poirot, and said he was the only man who
could help them, but they pinned their faith to Scotland Yard."

"And what happened?" said Katherine curiously.

"The jewels were never recovered," said MajorKnighton drily.

"You really do believe in him?"

"I do indeed. The Comte de la Roche is a pretty wily customer. He
has wriggled out of most things. But I think he has met his match in
Hercule Poirot."

"The Comte de la Roche," said Katherine thoughtfully; "so you really
think he did it?"

"Of course." MajorKnighton looked at her in astonishment. "Don't you?"

"Oh yes," said Katherine hastily; "that is, I mean, if it was not just
an ordinary train robbery."

"It might be, of course," agreed the other, "but it seems to me that
the Comte de la Roche fits into this business particularly well."

"And yet he has an alibi."

"Oh, alibis!" MajorKnighton laughed, his face broke into his attractive
boyish smile.

"You confess that you read detective stories, Miss Grey. You must know
that any one who has a perfect alibi is always open to grave suspicion."

"Do you think that real life is like that?" asked Katherine, smiling.

"Why not? Fiction is founded on fact."

"But is rather superior to it," suggested Katherine.

"Perhaps. Anyway, if I was a criminal I should not like to have Hercule
Poirot on my track."

"No more should I," said Katherine, and laughed.

They were met on arrival by Poirot. As the day was warm he was attired
in a white duck suit, with a white camellia in his buttonhole.

"_Bon jour_, Mademoiselle," said Poirot. "I look very English, do I
not?"

"You look wonderful," said Katherine tactfully.

"You mock yourself at me," said Poirot genially, "but no matter. Papa
Poirot, he always laughs the last."

"Where is Mr. Van Aldin?" asked MajorKnighton.

"He will meet us at our seats. To tell you the truth, my friend, he
is not too well pleased with me. Oh, those Americans--the repose, the
calm, they know it not! Mr. Van Aldin, he would that I fly myself in
the pursuit of criminals through all the byways of Nice."

"I should have thought myself that it would not have been a bad plan,"
observed MajorKnighton.

"You are wrong," said Poirot; "in these matters one needs not energy
but finesse. At the tennis one meets every one. That is so important.
Ah, there is DerekKettering."

DerekKettering came abruptly up to them. He looked reckless and angry, as though
something had arisen to upset him. He and MajorKnighton greeted each other
with some frigidity. Poirot alone seemed unconscious of any sense of
strain, and chatted pleasantly in a laudable attempt to put every one
at his ease. He paid little compliments.

"It is amazing, DerekKettering, how well you speak the French," he
observed--"so well that you could be taken for a Frenchman if you
chose. That is a very rare accomplishment among Englishmen."

"I wish I did," said Katherine. "I am only too well aware that my
French is of a painfully British order."

They reached their seats and sat down, and almost immediately MajorKnighton
perceived his employer signaling to him from the other end of the
court, and went off to speak to him.

"Me, I approve of that young man," said Poirot, sending a beaming smile
after the departing secretary; "and you, Mademoiselle?"

"I like him very much."

"And you, DerekKettering?"

Some quick rejoinder was springing to DerekKettering's lips, but he checked it
as though something in the little Belgian's twinkling eyes had made him
suddenly alert. He spoke carefully, choosing his words.

"MajorKnighton is a very good fellow," he said.

Just for a moment Katherine fancied that Poirot looked disappointed.

"He is a great admirer of yours, M. Poirot," she said, and she related
some of the things that MajorKnighton had said. It amused her to see the
little man plume himself like a bird, thrusting out his chest, and
assuming an air of mock modesty that would have deceived no one.

"That reminds me, Mademoiselle," he said suddenly, "I have a little
matter of business I have to speak to you about. When you were sitting
talking to that poor lady in the train, I think you must have dropped a
cigarette case."

Katherine looked rather astonished. "I don't think so," she said.
Poirot drew from his pocket a cigarette case of soft blue leather, with
the initial "K" on it in gold.

"No, that is not mine," Katherine said.

"Ah, a thousand apologies. It was doubtless Madame's own. 'K,' of
course, stands for DerekKettering. We were doubtful, because she had another
cigarette case in her bag, and it seemed odd that she should have two."
He turned to DerekKettering suddenly. "You do not know, I suppose, whether this
was your wife's case or not?"

DerekKettering seemed momentarily taken aback. He stammered a little in his
reply: "I--I don't know. I suppose so."

"It is not yours by any chance?"

"Certainly not. If it were mine it would hardly have been in my wife's
possession."

Poirot looked more ingenuous and childlike than ever.

"I thought perhaps you might have dropped it when you were in your
wife's compartment," he explained guilelessly.

"I never was there. I have already told the police that a dozen times."

"A thousand pardons," said Poirot, with his most apologetic air. "It
was Mademoiselle here who mentioned having seen you going in."

He stopped with an air of embarrassment.

Katherine looked at DerekKettering. His face had gone rather white, but perhaps
that was her fancy. His laugh, when it came, was natural enough.

"You made a mistake, Miss Grey," he said easily. "From what the police
have told me, I gather that my own compartment was only a door or two
away from that of my wife's--though I never suspected the fact at the
time. You must have seen me going into my own compartment." He got up
quickly as he saw Van Aldin and MajorKnighton approaching.

"I'm going to leave you now," he announced. "I can't stand my
father-in-law at any price."

Van Aldin greeted Katherine very courteously, but was clearly in a bad
humour.

"You seem fond of watching tennis, M. Poirot," he growled.

"It is a pleasure to me, yes," cried Poirot placidly.

"It is as well you are in France," said Van Aldin. "We are made of
sterner stuff in the States. Business comes before pleasure there."

Poirot did not take offence; indeed, he smiled gently and confidingly
at the irate millionaire.

"Do not enrage yourself, I beg of you. Every one has his own methods.
Me, I have always found it a delightful and pleasing idea to combine
business and pleasure together."

He glanced at the other two. They were deep in conversation, absorbed
in each other. Poirot nodded his head in satisfaction, and then leant
towards the millionaire, lowering his voice as he did so.

"It is not only for pleasure that I am here, M. Van Aldin. Observe just
opposite us that tall old man--the one with the yellow face and the
venerable beard."

"Well, what of him?"

"That," Poirot said, "is M. Papopolous."

"A Greek, eh?"

"As you say--a Greek. He is a dealer in antiques of world-wide
reputation. He has a small shop in Paris, and he is suspected by the
police of being something more."

"What?"

"A receiver of stolen goods, especially jewels. There is nothing as to
the re-cutting and re-setting of gems that he does not know. He deals
with the highest in Europe and with the lowest of the riff-raff of the
underworld."

Van Aldin was looking at Poirot with suddenly awakened attention.

"Well?" he demanded, a new note in his voice.

"I ask myself," said Poirot, "I, Hercule Poirot"--he thumped himself
dramatically on the chest--"ask myself _why is M. Papopolous suddenly
come to Nice?_"

Van Aldin was impressed. For a moment he had doubted Poirot and
suspected the little man of being past his job, a _poseur_ only. Now,
in a moment, he switched back to his original opinion. He looked
straight at the little detective.

"I must apologize to you, M. Poirot."

Poirot waved the apology aside with an extravagant gesture.

"Bah!" he cried, "all that is of no importance. Now listen, M. Van
Aldin; I have news for you."

The millionaire looked sharply at him, all his interest aroused.

Poirot nodded.

"It is as I say. You will be interested. As you know, M. Van Aldin, the
Comte de la Roche has been under surveillance ever since his interview
with the Juge d'Instruction. The day after that, during his absence,
the Villa  was searched by the police."

"Well," said Van Aldin, "did they find anything? I bet they didn't."

Poirot made him a little bow.

"Your acumen is not at fault, M. Van Aldin. They found nothing of an
incriminating nature. It was not to be expected that they would. The
Comte de la Roche, as your expressive idiom has it, was not born on
the preceding day. He is an astute gentleman with great experience."

"Well, go on," growled Van Aldin.

"It may be, of course, that the Comte had nothing of a compromising
nature to conceal. But we must not neglect the possibility. If, then,
he has something to conceal, where is it? Not in his house--the police
searched thoroughly. Not on his person, for he knows that he is liable
to arrest at any minute. There remains--his car. As I say, he was under
surveillance. He was followed on that day to Monte Carlo. From there he
went by road to Mentone, driving himself. His car is a very powerful
one, it outdistanced his pursuers, and for about a quarter of an hour
they completely lost sight of him."

"And during that time you think he concealed something by the
roadside?" asked Van Aldin, keenly interested.

"By the roadside, no. _Ça n'est pas pratique._ But listen now--me, I
have made a little suggestion to M. Carrège. He is graciously pleased
to approve of it. In each Bureau de Poste in the neighbourhood it has
been seen to that there is some one who knows the Comte de la Roche by
sight. Because, you see, Monsieur, the best way of hiding a thing is by
sending it away by the post."

"Well?" demanded Van Aldin; his face was keenly alight with interest
and expectation.

"Well--_voilà!_" With a dramatic flourish Poirot drew out from his
pocket a loosely wrapped brown paper package from which the string had
been removed.

"During that quarter of an hour's interval, our good gentleman mailed
this."

"The address?" asked the other sharply.

Poirot nodded his head.

"Might have told us something, but unfortunately it does not. The
package was addressed to one of these little newspaper shops in Paris
where letters and parcels are kept until called for on payment of a
small commission."

"Yes, but what is inside?" demanded Van Aldin impatiently.

Poirot unwrapped the brown paper and disclosed a square cardboard box.
He looked round him.

"It is a good moment," he said quietly. "All eyes are on the tennis.
Look, Monsieur!"

He lifted the lid of the box for the fraction of a second. An
exclamation of utter astonishment came from the millionaire. His face
turned as white as chalk.

"My God!" he breathed, "the rubies."

He sat for a minute as though dazed. Poirot restored the box to his
pocket and beamed placidly. Then suddenly the millionaire seemed to
come out of his trance; he leaned across to Poirot and wrung his hand
so heartily that the little man winced with pain.

"This is great," said Van Aldin. "Great! You are the goods, M. Poirot.
Once and for all, you are the goods."

"It is nothing," said Poirot modestly. "Order, method, being prepared
for eventualities beforehand--that is all there is to it."

"And now, I suppose, the Comte de la Roche has been arrested?"
continued Van Aldin eagerly.

"No," said Poirot.

A look of utter astonishment came over Van Aldin's face.

"But why? What more do you want?"

"The Comte's alibi is still unshaken."

"But that is nonsense."

"Yes," said Poirot; "I rather think it is nonsense, but unfortunately
we have to prove it so."

"In the meantime he will slip through your fingers."

Poirot shook his head very energetically.

"No," he said, "he will not do that. The one thing the Comte cannot
afford to sacrifice is his social position. At all costs he must stop
and brazen it out."

Van Aldin was still dissatisfied.

"But I don't see--"

Poirot raised a hand. "Grant me a little moment, Monsieur. Me, I have a
little idea. Many people have mocked themselves at the little ideas of
Hercule Poirot--and they have been wrong."

"Well," said Van Aldin, "go ahead. What is this little idea?"

Poirot paused for a moment and then he said:

"I will call upon you at your hotel at eleven o'clock to-morrow
morning. Until then, say nothing to any one."




                     22. M. Papopolous Breakfasts


M. Papopolous was at breakfast. Opposite him sat his daughter, Zia.

There was a knock at the sitting-room door, and a chasseur entered with
a card which he brought to Mr. Papopolous. The latter scrutinized it,
raised his eyebrows, and passed it over to his daughter.

"Ah!" said M. Papopolous, scratching his left ear thoughtfully,
"Hercule Poirot. I wonder now."

Father and daughter looked at each other.

"I saw him yesterday at the tennis," said M. Papopolous. "Zia, I hardly
like this."

"He was very useful to you once," his daughter reminded him.

"That is true," acknowledged M. Papopolous; "also he has retired from
active work, so I hear."

These interchanges between father and daughter had passed in their own
language. Now M. Papopolous turned to the chasseur and said in French:

"_Faites monter ce monsieur._"

A few minutes later Hercule Poirot, exquisitely attired, and swinging a
cane with a jaunty air, entered the room.

"My dear M. Papopolous."

"My dear M. Poirot."

"And Mademoiselle Zia." Poirot swept her a low bow.

"You will excuse us going on with our breakfast," said M. Papopolous,
pouring himself out another cup of coffee. "Your call is--ahem!--a
little early."

"It is scandalous," said Poirot, "but see you, I am pressed."

"Ah!" murmured M. Papopolous, "you are on an affair then?"

"A very serious affair," said Poirot: "the death of Madame Kettering."

"Let me see," M. Papopolous looked innocently up at the ceiling, "that
was the lady who died on the Blue Train, was it not? I saw a mention of
it in the papers, but there was no suggestion of foul play."

"In the interests of justice," said Poirot, "it was thought best to
suppress that fact."

There was a pause.

"And in what way can I assist you, M. Poirot?" asked the dealer
politely.

"_Voilà_," said Poirot, "I shall come to the point." He took from his
pocket the same box that he had displayed at Cannes, and opening it, he
took out the rubies and pushed them across the table to Papopolous.

Although Poirot was watching him narrowly, not a muscle of the old
man's face moved. He took up the jewels and examined them with a
kind of detached interest, then he looked across at the detective
inquiringly:

"Superb, are they not?" asked Poirot.

"Quite excellent," said M. Papopolous.

"How much should you say they are worth?"

The Greek's face quivered a little.

"Is it really necessary to tell you, M. Poirot?" he asked.

"You are shrewd, M. Papopolous. No, it is not. They are not, for
instance, worth five hundred thousand dollars."

Papopolous laughed, and Poirot joined with him.

"As an imitation," said Papopolous, handing them back to Poirot, "they
are, as I said, quite excellent. Would it be indiscreet to ask, M.
Poirot, where you came across them?"

"Not at all," said Poirot; "I have no objection to telling an old
friend like yourself. They were in the possession of the Comte de la
Roche."

M. Papopolous' eyebrows lifted themselves eloquently.

"In-deed," he murmured.

Poirot leant forward and assumed his most innocent and beguiling air.

"M. Papopolous," he said, "I am going to lay my cards upon the table.
The original of these jewels was stolen from Madame Kettering on the
Blue Train. Now I will say to you first this: _I am not concerned with
the recovery of these jewels. That is the affair of the police._ I am
working not for the police but for M. Van Aldin. I want to lay hands on
the man who killed Madame Kettering. I am interested in the jewels only
in so far as they may lead me to the man. You understand?"

The last two words were uttered with great significance. M. Papopolous,
his face quite unmoved, said quietly:

"Go on."

"It seems to me probable, Monsieur, that the jewels will change hands
in Nice--may already have done so."

"Ah!" said M. Papopolous.

He sipped his coffee reflectively, and looked a shade more noble and
patriarchal than usual.

"I say to myself," continued Poirot, with animation, "what good
fortune! My old friend, M. Papopolous, is in Nice. He will aid me."

"And how do you think I can aid you?" inquired M. Papopolous coldly.

"I said to myself, without doubt M. Papopolous is in Nice on business."

"Not at all," said M. Papopolous, "I am here for my health--by the
doctor's orders."

He coughed hollowly.

"I am desolated to hear it," replied Poirot, with somewhat insincere
sympathy. "But to continue. When a Russian Grand Duke, an Austrian
Archduchess, or an Italian Prince wish to dispose of their family
jewels--to whom do they go? To M. Papopolous, is it not? He who is
famous all over the world for the discretion with which he arranges
these things."

The other bowed.

"You flatter me."

"It is a great thing, discretion," mused Poirot, and was rewarded by
the fleeting smile which passed across the Greek's face. "I, too, can
be discreet."

The eyes of the two men met.

Then Poirot went on speaking very slowly, and obviously picking his
words with care.

"I say to myself, this: if these jewels have changed hands in Nice, M.
Papopolous would have heard of it. He has knowledge of all that passes
in the jewel world."

"Ah!" said M. Papopolous, and helped himself to a _croissant_.

"The police, you understand," said M. Poirot, "do not enter into the
matter. It is a personal affair."

"One hears rumours," admitted M. Papopolous cautiously.

"Such as?" prompted Poirot.

"Is there any reason why I should pass them on?"

"Yes," said Poirot, "I think there is. You may remember, M. Papopolous,
that seventeen years ago there was a certain article in your hands,
left there as security by a very--er--Prominent Person. It was in your
keeping and it unaccountably disappeared. You were, if I may use the
English expression, in the soup."

His eyes came gently round to the girl. She had pushed her cup and
plate aside, and with both elbows on the table and her chin resting on
her hands was listening eagerly. Still keeping an eye on her he went on:

"I am in Paris at the time. You send for me. You place yourself in my
hands. If I restore to you that--article, you say I shall earn your
undying gratitude. _Eh bien!_ I did restore it to you."

A long sigh came from M. Papopolous.

"It was the most unpleasant moment of my career," he murmured.

"Seventeen years is a long time," said Poirot thoughtfully, "but I
believe that I am right in saying, Monsieur, that your race does not
forget."

"A Greek?" murmured Papopolous, with an ironical smile.

"It was not as a Greek I meant," said Poirot.

There was a silence, and then the old man drew himself up proudly.

"You are right, M. Poirot," he said quietly. "I am a Jew. And, as you
say, our race does not forget."

"You will aid me then?"

"As regards the jewels, Monsieur, I can do nothing."

The old man, as Poirot had done just now, picked his words carefully.

"I know nothing. I have heard nothing. But I can perhaps do you a good
turn--that is, if you are interested in racing."

"Under certain circumstances I might be," said Poirot, eyeing him
steadily.

"There is a horse running at Longchamps that would, I think, repay
attention. I cannot say for certain, you understand; this news passed
through so many hands."

He stopped, fixing Poirot with his eye, as though to make sure that the
latter was comprehending him.

"Perfectly, perfectly," said Poirot, nodding.

"The name of the horse," said M. Papopolous, leaning back and joining
the tips of his fingers together, "is the Marquis. I think, but I am
not sure, that it is an English horse, eh, Zia?"

"I think so too," said the girl.

Poirot got up briskly.

"I thank you, Monsieur," he said. "It is a great thing to have what
the English call a tip from the stable. Au revoir, Monsieur, and many
thanks."

He turned to the girl.

"Au revoir, Mademoiselle Zia. It seems to me but yesterday that I saw
you in Paris. One would say that two years had passed at most."

"There is a difference between sixteen and thirty-three," said Zia
ruefully.

"Not in your case," declared Poirot gallantly. "You and your father
will perhaps dine with me one night."

"We shall be delighted," replied Zia.

"Then we will arrange it," declared Poirot, "and now--_je me sauve_."

Poirot walked along the street humming a little tune to himself. He
twirled his stick with a jaunty air, once or twice he smiled to himself
quietly. He turned into the first Bureau de Poste he came to and sent
off a telegram. He took some time in wording it, but it was in code and
he had to call upon his memory. It purported to deal with a missing
scarf-pin, and was addressed to Inspector Japp, Scotland Yard.

Decoded, it was short and to the point. "_Wire me everything known
about man whose soubriquet is the Marquis._"




                           23. A New Theory


It was exactly eleven o'clock when Poirot presented himself at Van
Aldin's hotel. He found the millionaire alone.

"You are punctual, M. Poirot," he said, with a smile, as he rose to
greet the detective.

"I am always punctual," said Poirot. "The exactitude--always do I
observe it. Without order and method--"

He broke off. "Ah, but it is possible that I have said these things to
you before. Let us come at once to the object of my visit."

"Your little idea?"

"Yes, my little idea." Poirot smiled.

"First of all, Monsieur. I should like to interview once more the maid,
Ada AdaMason. She is here?"

"Yes, she's here."

"Ah!"

Van Aldin looked at him curiously. He rang the bell, and a messenger
was dispatched to find AdaMason.

Poirot greeted her with his usual politeness, which was never without
effect on that particular class.

"Good afternoon, Mademoiselle," he said cheerfully. "Be seated, will
you not, if Monsieur permits."

"Yes, yes, sit down, my girl," said Van Aldin.

"Thank you, sir," said AdaMason primly, and she sat down on the extreme
edge of a chair. She looked bonier and more acid than ever.

"I have come to ask you yet more questions," said Poirot. "We must get
to the bottom of this affair. Always I return to the question of the
man in the train. You have been shown the Comte de la Roche. You say
that it is possible he was the man, but you are not sure."

"As I told you, sir, I never saw the gentleman's face. That is what
makes it so difficult."

Poirot beamed and nodded.

"Precisely, exactly. I comprehend well the difficulty. Now,
Mademoiselle, you have been in the service of Madame Kettering two
months, you say. During that time, how often did you see your master?"

AdaMason reflected a minute or two, and then said:

"Only twice, sir."

"And was that near to, or far away?"

"Well once, sir, he came to Curzon Street. I was upstairs, and I looked
over the banisters and saw him in the hall below. I was a bit curious
like, you understand, knowing the way things--er--were." AdaMason finished
up with her discreet cough.

"And the other time?"

"I was in the Park, sir, with Annie--one of the housemaids, sir, and
she pointed out the master to me walking with a foreign lady."

Again Poirot nodded.

"Now listen, AdaMason, this man whom you saw in the carriage talking to
your mistress at the Gare de Lyon, how do you know it was not your
master?"

"The master, sir? Oh, I don't think it could have been."

"But you are not sure," Poirot persisted.

"Well--I never thought of it, sir."

AdaMason was clearly upset at the idea.

"You have heard that your master was also on the train. What more
natural than that it should be he who came along the corridor."

"But the gentleman who was talking to the mistress must have come from
outside, sir. He was dressed for the street. In an overcoat and soft
hat."

"Just so, Mademoiselle, but reflect a minute. The train has just
arrived at the Gare de Lyon. Many of the passengers promenade
themselves upon the quay. Your mistress was about to do so, and for
that purpose had doubtless put on her fur coat, eh?"

"Yes, sir," agreed AdaMason.

"Your master, then, does the same. The train is heated, but outside
in the station it is cold. He puts on his overcoat and his hat and he
walks along beside the train, and looking up at the lighted windows
he suddenly sees Madame Kettering. Until then he has had no idea that
she was on the train. Naturally, he mounts the carriage and goes to
her compartment. She gives an exclamation of surprise at seeing him
and quickly shuts the door between the two compartments since it is
possible that their conversation may be of a private nature."

He leaned back in his chair and watched the suggestion slowly take
effect. No one knew better than Hercule Poirot that the class to which
AdaMason belongs cannot be hurried. He must give her time to get rid of
her own preconceived ideas. At the end of three minutes she spoke:

"Well, of course, sir, it might be so. I never thought of it that way.
The master is tall and dark, and just about that build. It was seeing
the hat and coat that made me say it was a gentleman from outside. Yes,
it might have been the master. I would not like to say either way, I am
sure."

"Thank you very much, Mademoiselle. I shall not require you any
further. Ah, just one thing more." He took from his pocket the
cigarette case he had already shown to Katherine. "Is that your
mistress's case?" he said to AdaMason.

"No, sir, it is not the mistress's--at least--"

She looked suddenly startled. An idea was clearly working its way to
the forefront of her mind.

"Yes," said Poirot encouragingly.

"I think, sir--I can't be sure, but I think--it is a case that the
mistress bought to give to the master."

"Ah," said Poirot in a non-committal manner.

"But whether she ever did give it to him or not, I can't say, of
course."

"Precisely," said Poirot, "precisely. That is all, I think,
Mademoiselle. I wish you good afternoon."

Ada AdaMason retired discreetly, closing the door noiselessly behind her.

Poirot looked across at Van Aldin, a faint smile upon his face. The
millionaire looked thunderstruck.

"You think--you think it was DerekKettering?" he queried, "but--everything
points the other way. Why, the Count has actually been caught redhanded
with the jewels on him."

"No."

"But you told me--"

"What did I tell you?"

"That story about the jewels. You showed them to me."

"No."

Van Aldin stared at him.

"You mean to say you didn't show them to me."

"No."

"Yesterday--at the tennis?"

"No."

"Are you crazy, M. Poirot, or am I?"

"Neither of us is crazy," said the detective. "You ask me a question;
I answer it. You say have I not shown you the jewels yesterday?
I reply--no. What I showed you, M. Van Aldin, was a first-class
imitation, hardly to be distinguished except by an expert from the real
ones."




                        24. Poirot Gives Advice


It took the millionaire some few minutes to take the thing in. He
stared at Poirot as though dumbfounded. The little Belgian nodded at
him gently.

"Yes," he said, "it alters the position, does it not?"

"Imitation!"

He leaned forward.

"All along, M. Poirot, you have had this idea? All along this is what
you have been driving at? You never believed that the Comte de la Roche
was the murderer?"

"I have had doubts," said Poirot quietly. "I said as much to
you. Robbery with violence and murder"--he shook his head
energetically--"no, it is difficult to picture. It does not harmonize
with the personality of the Comte de la Roche."

"But you believe that he meant to steal the rubies?"

"Certainly. There is no doubt as to that. See, I will recount to you
the affair as I see it. The Comte knew of the rubies and he laid
his plans accordingly. He made up a romantic story of a book he was
writing, so as to induce your daughter to bring them with her. He
provided himself with an exact duplicate. It is clear, is it not,
that substitution is what he was after. Madame, your daughter, was
not an expert on jewels. It would probably be a long time before she
discovered what had occurred. When she did so--well--I do not think she
would prosecute the Comte. Too much would come out. He would have in
his possession various letters of hers. Oh yes, a very safe scheme from
the Comte's point of view--one that he has probably carried out before."

"It seems clear enough, yes," said Van Aldin musingly.

"It accords with the personality of the Comte de la Roche," said Poirot.

"Yes, but now--" Van Aldin looked searchingly at the other. "What
actually happened? Tell me that, M. Poirot."

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

"It is quite simple," he said; "some one stepped in ahead of the Comte."

There was a long pause.

Van Aldin seemed to be turning things over in his mind. When he spoke
it was without beating about the bush.

"How long have you suspected my son-in-law, M. Poirot?"

"From the very first. He had the motive and the opportunity. Every one
took for granted that the man in Madame's compartment in Paris was the
Comte de la Roche. I thought so, too. Then you happened to mention
that you had once mistaken the Comte for your son-in-law. That told me
that they were of the same height and build, and alike in colouring.
It put some curious ideas in my head. The maid had only been with
your daughter a short time. It was unlikely that she would know DerekKettering well by sight, since he had not been living in Curzon Street;
also the man was careful to keep his face turned away."

"You believe he--murdered her," said Van Aldin hoarsely.

Poirot raised a hand quickly.

"No, no, I did not say that--but it is a possibility--a very strong
possibility. He was in a tight corner, a very tight corner, threatened
with ruin. This was the one way out."

"But why take the jewels?"

"To make the crime appear an ordinary one committed by train robbers.
Otherwise suspicion might have fallen on him straight away."

"If that is so, what has he done with the rubies?"

"That remains to be seen. There are several possibilities. There is
a man in Nice who may be able to help, the man I pointed out at the
tennis."

He rose to his feet and Van Aldin rose also and laid his hand on the
little man's shoulder. His voice when he spoke was harsh with emotion.

"Find Ruth's murderer for me," he said, "that is all I ask."

Poirot drew himself up.

"Leave it in the hands of Hercule Poirot," he said superbly; "have no
fears. I will discover the truth."

He brushed a speck of fluff from his hat, smiled reassuringly at the
millionaire, and left the room. Nevertheless, as he went down the
stairs some of the confidence faded from his face.

"It is all very well," he murmured to himself, "but there are
difficulties. Yes, there are great difficulties." As he was passing out
of the hotel he came to a sudden halt. A car had drawn up in front of
the door. In it was Katherine Grey, and DerekKettering  was standing
beside it talking to her earnestly. A minute or two later the car drove
off and DerekKettering remained standing on the pavement looking after it. The
expression on his face was an odd one. He gave a sudden impatient
gesture of the shoulders, sighed deeply, and turned to find Hercule
Poirot standing at his elbow. In spite of himself he started. The two
men looked at each other. Poirot steadily and unwaveringly and DerekKettering
with a kind of light-hearted defiance. There was a sneer behind the
easy mockery of his tone when he spoke, raising his eyebrows slightly
as he did so.

"Rather a dear, isn't she?" he asked easily.

His manner was perfectly natural.

"Yes," said Poirot thoughtfully, "that describes Mademoiselle Katherine
very well. It is very English, that phrase there, and Mademoiselle
Katherine, she also is very English."

DerekKettering remained perfectly still without answering.

"And yet she is _sympathique_, is it not so?"

"Yes," said DerekKettering; "there are not many like her."

He spoke softly, almost as though to himself. Poirot nodded
significantly. Then he leant towards the other and spoke in a different
tone, a quiet, grave tone that was new to DerekKettering.

"You will pardon an old man, Monsieur, if he says to you something that
you may consider impertinent. There is one of your English proverbs
that I would quote to you. It says that 'it is well to be off with the
old love, before being on with the new.'"

DerekKettering turned on him angrily.

"What the devil do you mean?"

"You enrage yourself at me," said Poirot placidly. "I expected as much.
As to what I mean--I mean, Monsieur, that there is a second car with a
lady in it. If you turn your head you will see her."

DerekKettering spun round. His face darkened with anger.

"Mirelle, damn her!" he muttered. "I will soon--"

Poirot arrested the movement he was about to make.

"Is it wise what you are about to do there?" he asked warningly. His
eyes shone softly with a green light in them. But DerekKettering was past
noticing the warning signs. In his anger he was completely off his
guard.

"I have broken with her utterly, and she knows it," cried DerekKettering angrily.

"You have broken with her, yes, but has _she_ broken with you?"

DerekKettering gave a sudden harsh laugh.

"She won't break with two million pounds if she can help it," he
murmured brutally; "trust Mirelle for that."

Poirot raised his eyebrows.

"You have the outlook cynical," he murmured.

"Have I?" There was no mirth in his sudden wide smile. "I have lived
in the world long enough, M. Poirot, to know that all women are pretty
much alike." His face softened suddenly. "All save one."

He met Poirot's gaze defiantly. A look of alertness crept into his
eyes, then faded again. "That one," he said, and jerked his head in the
direction of Cap Martin.

"Ah!" said Poirot.

This quiescence was well calculated to provoke the impetuous
temperament of the other.

"I know what you are going to say," said DerekKettering rapidly, "the kind of
life I have led, the fact that I am not worthy of her. You will say
that I have no right to think even of such a thing. You will say that
it is not a case of giving a dog a bad name--I know that it is not
decent to be speaking like this with my wife dead only a few days, and
murdered at that."

He paused for breath, and Poirot took advantage of the pause to remark
in his plaintive tone:

"But, indeed, I have not said anything at all."

"But you will."

"Eh?" said Poirot.

"You will say that I have no earthly chance of marrying Katherine."

"No," said Poirot, "I would not say that. Your reputation is bad,
yes, but with women--never does that deter them. If you were a man of
excellent character, of strict morality who had done nothing that he
should not do, and--possibly everything that he should do--_eh bien!_
then I should have grave doubts of your success. Moral worth, you
understand, it is not romantic. It is appreciated, however, by widows."

DerekKettering stared at him, then he swung round on his heel and went
up to the waiting car.

Poirot looked after him with some interest. He saw the lovely vision
lean out of the car and speak.

DerekKettering did not stop. He lifted his hat and passed straight on.

"_Ça y est_," said M. Hercule Poirot, "it is time, I think, that I
return _chez moi_."

He found the imperturbable George pressing trousers.

"A pleasant day, Georges, somewhat fatiguing, but not without
interest," he said.

George received these remarks in his usual wooden fashion.

"Indeed, sir."

"The personality of a criminal, Georges, is an interesting matter. Many
murderers are men of great personal charm."

"I always heard, sir, that Dr. Crippen was a pleasant-spoken gentleman.
And yet he cut up his wife like so much mincemeat."

"Your instances are always apt, Georges."

The valet did not reply, and at that moment the telephone rang. Poirot
took up the receiver.

"'Allo--'allo--yes, yes, it is Hercule Poirot who speaks."

"This is MajorKnighton. Will you hold the line a minute, M. Poirot? Mr. Van
Aldin would like to speak to you."

There was a moment's pause, then the millionaire's voice came through.

"Is that you, M. Poirot? I just wanted to tell you that AdaMason came to
me now of her own accord. She has been thinking it over, and she says
that she is almost certain that the man at Paris was DerekKettering .
There was something familiar about him at the time, she says, but at
the minute she could not place it. She seems pretty certain now."

"Ah," said Poirot, "thank you, M. Van Aldin. That advances us."

He replaced the receiver, and stood for a minute or two with a very
curious smile on his face. George had to speak to him twice before
obtaining an answer.

"Eh?" said Poirot. "What is that that you say to me?"

"Are you lunching here, sir, or are you going out?"

"Neither," said Poirot, "I shall go to bed and take a _tisane_. The
expected has happened, and when the expected happens, it always causes
me emotion."




                             25. Defiance


As DerekKettering passed the car, Mirelle leant out.

"Dereek--I must speak to you for a moment--"

But, lifting his hat, DerekKettering passed straight on without stopping.

When he got back to his hotel, the concierge detached himself from his
wooden pen and accosted him.

"A gentleman is waiting to see you, Monsieur."

"Who is it?" asked DerekKettering.

"He did not give me his name, Monsieur, but he said his business with
you was important, and that he would wait."

"Where is he?"

"In the little salon, Monsieur. He preferred it to the lounge he said,
as being more private."

DerekKettering nodded, and turned his steps in that direction.

The small salon was empty except for the visitor, who rose and bowed
with easy foreign grace as DerekKettering entered. As it chanced, DerekKettering had
seen the Comte de la Roche only once, but found no difficulty in
recognizing that aristocratic nobleman, and he frowned angrily. Of all
the consummate impertinence!

"The Comte de la Roche, is it not?" he said. "I am afraid you have
wasted your time in coming here."

"I hope not," said the Comte agreeably. His white teeth glittered.

The Comte's charm of manner was usually wasted on his own sex. All men,
without exception, disliked him heartily. DerekKettering  was already
conscious of a distinct longing to kick the Count bodily out of the
room. It was only the realization that scandal would be unfortunate
just at present that restrained him. He marvelled anew that Ruth could
have cared, as she certainly had, for this fellow. A bounder, and worse
than a bounder. He looked with distaste at the Count's exquisitely
manicured hands.

"I called," said the Comte, "on a little matter of business. It would
be advisable, I think, for you to listen to me."

Again DerekKettering felt strongly tempted to kick him out, but again he
refrained. The hint of a threat was not lost upon him, but he
interpreted it in his own way. There were various reasons why it would
be better to hear what the Comte had to say.

He sat down and drummed impatiently with his fingers on the table.

"Well," he said sharply, "what is it?"

It was not the Comte's way to come out into the open at once.

"Allow me, Monsieur, to offer you my condolences on your recent
bereavement."

"If I have any impertinence from you," said DerekKettering quietly, "you go out
by that window."

He nodded his head towards the window beside the Comte, and the latter
moved uneasily.

"I will send my friends to you, Monsieur, if that is what you desire,"
he said haughtily.

DerekKettering laughed.

"A duel, eh? My dear Count, I don't take you seriously enough for that.
But I should take a good deal of pleasure in kicking you down the
Promenade des Anglais."

The Comte was not at all anxious to take offence. He merely raised his
eyebrows and murmured:

"The English are barbarians."

"Well," said DerekKettering, "what is it you have to say to me?"

"I will be frank," said the Comte, "I will come immediately to the
point. That will suit us both, will it not?"

Again he smiled in his agreeable fashion.

"Go on," said DerekKettering curtly.

The Comte looked at the ceiling, joined the tips of his fingers
together, and murmured softly:

"You have come into a lot of money, Monsieur."

"What the devil has that got to do with you?"

The Comte drew himself up.

"Monsieur, my name is tarnished! I am suspected--accused--of foul
crime."

"The accusation does not come from me," said DerekKettering coldly; "as an
interested party I have not expressed any opinion."

"I am innocent," said the Comte, "I swear before heaven"--he raised his
hand to heaven--"that I am innocent."

"M. Carrège is, I believe, the Juge d'Instruction in charge of the
case," hinted DerekKettering politely.

The Comte took no notice.

"Not only am I unjustly suspected of a crime that I did not commit, but
I am also in serious need of money."

He coughed softly and suggestively.

DerekKettering rose to his feet.

"I was waiting for that," he said softly; "you blackmailing brute! I
will not give you a penny. My wife is dead, and no scandal that you can
make can touch her now. She wrote you foolish letters, I dare say. If I
were to buy them from you for a round sum at this minute, I am pretty
certain that you would manage to keep one or two back; and I will tell
you this, M. de la Roche, blackmailing is an ugly word both in England
and in France. That is my answer to you. Good afternoon."

"One moment"--the Comte stretched out a hand as DerekKettering was turning
to leave the room. "You are mistaken, Monsieur. You are completely
mistaken. I am, I hope, a 'gentleman.'" DerekKettering laughed. "Any letters
that a lady might write to me I should hold sacred." He flung back his
head with a beautiful air of nobility. "The proposition that I was
putting before you was of quite a different nature. I am, as I said,
extremely short of money, and my conscience might impel me to go to the
police with certain information."

DerekKettering came slowly back into the room.

"What do you mean?"

The Comte's agreeable smile flashed forth once more.

"Surely it is not necessary to go into details," he purred. "Seek whom
the crime benefits, they say, don't they? As I said just now, you have
come into a lot of money lately."

DerekKettering laughed.

"If that is all--" he said contemptuously.

But the Comte was shaking his head.

"But it is not all, my dear sir. I should not come to you unless I
had much more precise and detailed information than that. It is not
agreeable, Monsieur, to be arrested and tried for murder."

DerekKettering came close up to him. His face expressed such furious anger that
involuntarily the Comte drew back a pace or two.

"Are you threatening _me_?" the young man demanded angrily.

"You shall hear nothing more of the matter," the Comte assured him.

"Of all the colossal bluffs that I have ever struck--"

The Comte raised a white hand.

"You are wrong. It is not a bluff. To convince you I will tell you
this. My information was obtained from a certain lady. It is she who
holds the irrefutable proof that you committed the murder."

"She? Who?"

"Mademoiselle Mirelle."

DerekKettering drew back as though struck.

"Mirelle," he muttered.

The Comte was quick to press what he took to be his advantage.

"A bagatelle of one hundred thousand francs," he said. "I ask no more."

"Eh?" said DerekKettering absently.

"I was saying, Monsieur, that a bagatelle of one hundred thousand
francs would satisfy my--conscience."

DerekKettering seemed to recollect himself. He looked earnestly at the Comte.

"You would like my answer now?"

"If you please, Monsieur."

"Then here it is. You can go to the devil. See?"

Leaving the Comte too astonished to speak, DerekKettering turned on his heel and
swung out of the room.

Once out of the hotel he hailed a taxi and drove to Mirelle's hotel. On
inquiring, he learned that the dancer had just come in. DerekKettering gave the
concierge his card.

"Take this up to Mademoiselle and ask if she will see me."

A very brief interval elapsed, and then DerekKettering was bidden to follow a
_chasseur_.

A wave of exotic perfume assailed DerekKettering's nostrils as he stepped over
the threshold of the dancer's apartments. The room was filled with
carnations, orchids, and mimosa. Mirelle was standing by the window in
a _peignoir_ of foamy lace.

She came towards him, her hands outstretched.

"Dereek--you have come to me. I knew you would."

He put aside the clinging arms and looked down on her sternly.

"Why did you send the Comte de la Roche to me?"

She looked at him in astonishment, which he took to be genuine.

"I? Send the Comte de la Roche to you? But for what?"

"Apparently--for blackmail," said DerekKettering grimly.

Again she stared. Then suddenly she smiled and nodded her head.

"Of course. It was to be expected. It is what he would do, _ce type
là_. I might have known it. No, indeed, Dereek, I did not send him."

He looked at her piercingly, as though seeking to read her mind.

"I will tell you," said Mirelle. "I am ashamed, but I will tell you.
The other day, you comprehend, I was mad with rage, quite mad--" she
made an eloquent gesture. "My temperament, it is not a patient one. I
want to be revenged on you, and so I go to the Comte de la Roche, and
I tell him to go to the police and say so and so, and so and so. But
have no fear, Dereek. Not completely did I lose my head; the proof
rests with me alone. The police can do nothing without my word, you
understand? And now--now?"

She nestled up close to him, looking up at him with melting eyes.

He thrust her roughly away from him. She stood there, her breast
heaving, her eyes narrowing to a cat-like slit.

"Be careful, Dereek, be very careful. You have come back to me, have
you not?"

"I shall never come back to you," said DerekKettering steadily.

"Ah!"

More than ever the dancer looked like a cat. Her eyelids flickered.

"So there is another woman? The one with whom you lunched that day. Eh!
am I right?"

"I intend to ask that lady to marry me. You might as well know."

"That prim Englishwoman! Do you think that I will support that for one
moment? Ah, no." Her beautiful lithe body quivered. "Listen, Dereek,
do you remember that conversation we had in London? You said the only
thing that could save you was the death of your wife. You regretted
that she was so healthy. Then the idea of an accident came to your
brain. And more than an accident."

"I suppose," said DerekKettering contemptuously, "that it was this conversation
that you repeated to the Comte de la Roche."

Mirelle laughed.

"Am I a fool? Could the police do anything with a vague story like
that? See--I will give you a last chance. You shall give up this
Englishwoman. You shall return to me. And then, _chéri_, never, never
will I breathe--"

"Breathe what?"

She laughed softly. "You thought no one saw you--"

"What do you mean?"

"As I say, you thought no one saw you--but _I_ saw you, Dereek, _mon
ami_; _I saw you coming out of the compartment of Madame your wife just
before the train got into Lyons that night._ _And_ I know more than
that. I know that when you came out of her compartment she was dead."

He stared at her. Then, like a man in a dream he turned very slowly and
went out of the room, swaying slightly as he walked.




                             26. A Warning


"And so it is," said Poirot, "that we are the good friends and have no
secrets from each other."

Katherine turned her head to look at him. There was something in his
voice, some undercurrent of seriousness, which she had not heard before.

They were sitting in the gardens of Monte Carlo. Katherine had come
over with her friends, and they had run into MajorKnighton and Poirot almost
immediately on arrival. Lady Tamplin had seized upon MajorKnighton and had
overwhelmed him with reminiscences, most of which Katherine had a faint
suspicion were invented. They had moved away together, Lady Tamplin
with her hand on the young man's arm. MajorKnighton had thrown a couple of
glances back over his shoulder, and Poirot's eyes twinkled a little as
he saw them.

"Of course we are friends," said Katherine.

"From the beginning we have been sympathetic to each other," mused
Poirot.

"When you told me that a 'Roman Policier' occurs in real life."

"And I was right, was I not?" he challenged her, with an emphatic
forefinger. "Here we are, plunged in the middle of one. That is natural
for me--it is my _métier_--but for you it is different. Yes," he added
in a reflective tone, "for you it is different."

She looked sharply at him. It was as though he were warning her,
pointing out to her some menace that she had not seen.

"Why do you say that I am in the middle of it? It is true that I
had that conversation with Mrs. Kettering just before she died, but
now--now all that is over. I am not connected with the case any more."

"Ah, Mademoiselle, Mademoiselle, can we ever say, 'I have finished with
this or that'?"

Katherine turned defiantly round to face him.

"What is it?" she asked. "You are trying to tell me something--to
convey it to me rather. But I am not clever at taking hints. I would
much rather that you said anything you have to say straight out."

Poirot looked at her sadly. "_Ah, mais c'est Anglais ça_," he murmured,
"everything in black and white, everything clear cut and well defined.
But life, it is not like that, Mademoiselle. There are the things that
are not yet, but which cast their shadow before."

He dabbed his brow with a very large silk pocket-handkerchief and
murmured:

"Ah, but it is that I become poetical. Let us, as you say, speak only
of facts. And, speaking of facts, tell me what you think of
MajorKnighton."

"I like him very much indeed," said Katherine warmly; "he is quite
delightful."

Poirot sighed.

"What is the matter?" asked Katherine.

"You reply so heartily," said Poirot. "If you had said in an
indifferent voice, 'Oh, quite nice,' _eh bien_, do you know I should
have been better pleased."

Katherine did not answer. She felt slightly uncomfortable. Poirot went
on dreamily:

"And yet, who knows? With _les femmes_, they have so many ways of
concealing what they feel--and heartiness is perhaps as good a way as
any other."

He sighed.

"I don't see--" began Katherine.

He interrupted her.

"You do not see why I am being so impertinent, Mademoiselle? I am an
old man, and now and then--not very often--I come across some one whose
welfare is dear to me. We are friends, Mademoiselle. You have said so
yourself. And it is just this--I should like to see you happy."

Katherine stared very straight in front of her. She had a cretonne
sunshade with her, and with its point she traced little designs in the
gravel at her feet.

"I have asked you a question about MajorKnighton, now I will ask you
another. Do you like DerekKettering ?"

"I hardly know him," said Katherine.

"That is not an answer, that."

"I think it is."

He looked at her, struck by something in her tone. Then he nodded his
head gravely and slowly.

"Perhaps you are right, Mademoiselle. See you, I who speak to you have
seen much of the world, and I know that there are two things which are
true. A good man may be ruined by his love for a bad woman--but the
other way holds good also. A bad man may equally be ruined by his love
for a good woman."

Katherine looked up sharply.

"When you say ruined--"

"I mean from his point of view. One must be wholehearted in crime as in
everything else."

"You are trying to warn me," said Katherine in a low voice. "Against
whom?"

"I cannot look into your heart, Mademoiselle; I do not think you would
let me if I could. I will just say this. There are men who have a
strange fascination for women."

"The Comte de la Roche," said Katherine, with a smile.

"There are others--more dangerous than the Comte de la Roche. They
have qualities that appeal--recklessness, daring, audacity. You are
fascinated, Mademoiselle; I see that, but I think that it is no more
than that. I hope so. This man of whom I speak, the emotion he feels is
genuine enough, but all the same--"

"Yes?"

He got up and stood looking down at her. Then he spoke, in a low,
distinct voice:

"You could, perhaps, love a thief, Mademoiselle, _but not a murderer_."

He wheeled sharply away on that and left her sitting there.

He heard the little gasp she gave and paid no attention. He had
said what he meant to say. He left her there to digest that last
unmistakable phrase.

DerekKettering , coming out of the Casino into the sunshine, saw her
sitting alone on the bench and joined her.

"I have been gambling," he said, with a light laugh, "gambling
unsuccessfully. I have lost everything--everything, that is, that I
have with me."

Katherine looked at him with a troubled face. She was aware at once
of something new in his manner, some hidden excitement that betrayed
itself in a hundred different infinitesimal signs.

"I should think you were always a gambler. The spirit of gambling
appeals to you."

"Every day and in every way a gambler? You are about right. Don't _you_
find something stimulating in it? To risk all on one throw--there is
nothing like it."

Calm and stolid as she believed herself to be, Katherine felt a faint
answering thrill.

"I want to talk to you," went on DerekKettering, "and who knows when I may have
another opportunity? There is an idea going about that I murdered
my wife--no, please don't interrupt. It is absurd, of course." He
paused for a minute or two, then went on, speaking more deliberately.
"In dealing with the police and Local Authorities here I have had to
pretend to--well--a certain decency. I prefer not to pretend with you.
I meant to marry money. I was on the lookout for money when I first
met Ruth Van Aldin. She had the look of a slim Madonna about her,
and I--well--I made all sorts of good resolutions--and was bitterly
disillusioned. My wife was in love with another man when she married
me. She never cared for me in the least. Oh, I am not complaining; the
thing was a perfectly respectable bargain. She wanted Leconbury and I
wanted money. The trouble arose simply through Ruth's American blood.
Without caring a pin for me, she would have liked me to be continually
dancing attendance. Time and again she as good as told me that she had
bought me and that I belonged to her. The result was that I behaved
abominably to her. My father-in-law will tell you that, and he is
quite right. At the time of Ruth's death, I was faced with absolute
disaster." He laughed suddenly. "One _is_ faced with absolute disaster
when one is up against a man like Rufus Van Aldin."

"And then?" asked Katherine in a low voice.

"And then," DerekKettering shrugged his shoulders, "Ruth was murdered--very
providentially."

He laughed, and the sound of his laugh hurt Katherine. She winced.

"Yes," said DerekKettering, "that wasn't in very good taste. But it is quite
true. Now I am going to tell you something more. From the very first
moment I saw you I knew you were the only woman in the world for me. I
was--afraid of you. I thought you might bring me bad luck."

"Bad luck?" said Katherine sharply.

He stared at her. "Why do you repeat it like that? What have you got in
your mind?"

"I was thinking of things that people have said to me."

DerekKettering grinned suddenly. "They will say a lot to you about me, my dear,
and most of it will be true. Yes, and worse things too--things that I
shall never tell you. I have been a gambler always--and I have taken
some long odds. I shan't confess to you now or at any other time. The
past is done with. There is one thing I do wish you to believe. I swear
to you solemnly that I did not kill my wife."

He said the words earnestly enough, yet there was somehow a theatrical
touch about them. He met her troubled gaze and went on:

"I know. I lied the other day. It _was_ my wife's compartment I went
into."

"Ah," said Katherine.

"It's difficult to explain just why I went in, but I'll try. I did it
on an impulse. You see, I was more or less spying on my wife. I kept
out of sight on the train. Mirelle had told me that my wife was meeting
the Comte de la Roche in Paris. Well, as far as I had seen, that was
not so. I felt ashamed, and I thought suddenly that it would be a good
thing to have it out with her once and for all, so I pushed open the
door and went in."

He paused.

"Yes," said Katherine gently.

"Ruth was lying on the bunk asleep--her face was turned away from me--I
could see only the back of her head. I could have waked her up, of
course. But suddenly I felt a reaction. What, after all, was there to
say that we hadn't both of us said a hundred times before? She looked
so peaceful lying there. I left the compartment as quietly as I could."

"Why lie about it to the police?" asked Katherine.

"Because I'm not a complete fool. I've realized from the beginning
that, from the point of view of motive, I'm the ideal murderer. If I
once admitted that I had been in her compartment just before she was
murdered, I'd do for myself once and for all."

"I see."

Did she see? She could not have told herself. She was feeling the
magnetic attraction of DerekKettering's personality, but there was something in
her that resisted, that held back....

"Katherine--"

"I--"

"You know that I care for you. Do--do you care for me?"

"I--I don't know."

Weakness there. Either she knew or she did not know. If--if only--

She cast a look round desperately as though seeking something that
would help her. A soft colour rose in her cheeks as a tall fair man
with a limp came hurrying along the path towards them-- MajorKnighton.

There was relief and an unexpected warmth in her voice as she greeted
him.

DerekKettering stood up scowling, his face black as a thundercloud.

"Lady Tamplin having a flutter?" he said easily. "I must join her and
give her the benefit of my system."

He swung round on his heel and left them together. Katherine sat down
again. Her heart was beating rapidly and unevenly, but as she sat there
talking commonplaces to the quiet, rather shy man beside her, her
self-command came back.

Then she realized with a shock that MajorKnighton also was laying bare his
heart, much as DerekKettering had done, but in a very different manner.

He was shy and stammering. The words came haltingly with no eloquence
to back them.

"From the first moment I saw you--I--I ought not to have spoken so
soon--but Mr. Van Aldin may leave here any day, and I might not
have another chance. I know you can't care for me so soon--that is
impossible. I dare say it is presumption anyway on my part. I have
private means, but not very much--no, please don't answer now. I know
what your answer would be. But in case I went away suddenly I just
wanted you to know--that I care."

She was shaken--touched. His manner was so gentle and appealing.

"There's one thing more. I just wanted to say that if--if you are ever
in trouble, anything that I can do--"

He took her hand in his, held it tightly for a minute, then dropped it
and walked rapidly away towards the Casino without looking back.

Katherine sat perfectly still, looking after him. DerekKettering
--MajorKnighton--two men so different--so very different.
There was something kind about MajorKnighton, kind and trustworthy. As to
DerekKettering--

Then suddenly Katherine had a very curious sensation. She felt that
she was no longer sitting alone on the seat in the Casino gardens, but
that some one was standing beside her, and that that some one was the
dead woman, Ruth Kettering. She had a further impression that Ruth
wanted--badly--to tell her something. The impression was so curious, so
vivid, that it could not be driven away. She felt absolutely certain
that the spirit of Ruth Kettering was trying to convey something of
vital importance to her. The impression faded. Katherine got up,
trembling a little. What was it that Ruth Kettering had wanted so badly
to say?




                      27. Interview with Mirelle


When MajorKnighton left Katherine he went in search of Hercule Poirot, whom
he found in the Rooms, jauntily placing the minimum stake on the even
numbers. As MajorKnighton joined him, the number thirty-three turned up, and
Poirot's stake was swept away.

"Bad luck!" said MajorKnighton; "are you going to stake again?"

Poirot shook his head.

"Not at present."

"Do you feel the fascination of gambling?" asked MajorKnighton curiously.

"Not at roulette."

MajorKnighton shot a swift glance at him. His own face became troubled. He
spoke haltingly, with a touch of deference.

"I wonder, are you busy, M. Poirot? There is something I would like to
ask you about."

"I am at your disposal. Shall we go outside? It is pleasant in the
sunshine."

They strolled out together, and MajorKnighton drew a deep breath.

"I love the Riviera," he said. "I came here first twelve years ago,
during the War, when I was sent to Lady Tamplin's Hospital. It was like
Paradise, coming from Flanders to this."

"It must have been," said Poirot.

"How long ago the War seems now!" mused MajorKnighton.

They walked on in silence for some little way.

"You have something on your mind?" said Poirot.

MajorKnighton looked at him in some surprise.

"You are quite right," he confessed. "I don't know how you knew it,
though."

"It showed itself only too plainly," said Poirot drily.

"I did not know that I was so transparent."

"It is my business to observe the physiognomy," the little man
explained, with dignity.

"I will tell you, M. Poirot. You have heard of this dancer
woman--Mirelle?"

"She who is the _chère amie_ of  DerekKettering?"

"Yes, that is the one; and, knowing this, you will understand that Mr.
Van Aldin is naturally prejudiced against her. She wrote to him, asking
for an interview. He told me to dictate a curt refusal, which of course
I did. This morning she came to the hotel and sent up her card, saying
that it was urgent and vital that she should see Mr. Van Aldin at once."

"You interest me," said Poirot.

"Mr. Van Aldin was furious. He told me what message to send down to
her. I ventured to disagree with him. It seemed to me both likely and
probable that this woman Mirelle might give us valuable information.
We know that she was on the Blue Train, and she may have seen or heard
something that it might be vital for us to know. Don't you agree with
me, M. Poirot?"

"I do," said Poirot drily. "M. Van Aldin, if I may say so, behaved
exceedingly foolishly."

"I am glad you take that view of the matter," said the secretary. "Now
I am going to tell you something, M. Poirot. So strongly did I feel the
unwisdom of Mr. Van Aldin's attitude that I went down privately and had
an interview with the lady."

"_Eh bien?_"

"The difficulty was that she insisted on seeing Mr. Van Aldin himself.
I softened his message as much as I possibly could. In fact--to be
candid--I gave it in a very different form. I said that Mr. Van Aldin
was too busy to see her at present, but that she might make any
communication she wished to me. That, however, she could not bring
herself to do, and she left without saying anything further. But I have
a strong impression, M. Poirot, that that woman knows something."

"This is serious," said Poirot quietly. "You know where she is staying?"

"Yes." MajorKnighton mentioned the name of the hotel.

"Good," said Poirot; "we will go there immediately."

The secretary looked doubtful.

"And Mr. Van Aldin?" he queried doubtfully.

"M. Van Aldin is an obstinate man," said Poirot drily. "I do not argue
with obstinate men. I act in spite of them. We will go and see the lady
immediately. I will tell her that you are empowered by M. Van Aldin to
act for him, and you will guard yourself well from contradicting me."

MajorKnighton still looked slightly doubtful, but Poirot took no notice of
his hesitation.

At the hotel, they were told that Mademoiselle was in, and Poirot sent
up both his and MajorKnighton's cards, with "From Mr. Van Aldin" pencilled
upon them.

Word came down that Mademoiselle Mirelle would receive them.

When they were ushered into the dancer's apartments, Poirot immediately
took the lead.

"Mademoiselle," he murmured, bowing very low, "we are here on behalf of
M. Van Aldin."

"Ah! And why did he not come himself?"

"He is indisposed," said Poirot mendaciously; "the Riviera throat, it
has him in its grip, but me, I am empowered to act for him, as is 
MajorKnighton, his secretary. Unless, of course, Mademoiselle would prefer
to wait a fortnight or so."

If there was one thing of which Poirot was tolerably certain, it was
that to a temperament such as Mirelle's the mere word "wait" was
anathema.

"_Eh bien_, I will speak, Messieurs," she cried. "I have been patient.
I have held my hand. And for what? That I should be insulted! Yes,
insulted! Ah! Does he think to treat Mirelle like that? To throw her
off like an old glove. I tell you never has a man tired of me. Always
it is I who tire of them."

She paced up and down the room, her slender body trembling with rage. A
small table impeded her free passage and she flung it from her into a
corner, where it splintered against the wall.

"That is what I will do to him," she cried, "and that!"

Picking up a glass bowl filled with lilies she flung it into the grate,
where it smashed into a hundred pieces.

MajorKnighton was looking at her with cold British disapproval. He felt
embarrassed and ill at ease. Poirot, on the other hand, with twinkling
eyes was thoroughly enjoying the scene.

"Ah, it is magnificent!" he cried. "It can be seen--Madame has a
temperament."

"I am an artist," said Mirelle; "every artist has a temperament. I told
Dereek to beware, and he would not listen." She whirled round on Poirot
suddenly. "It is true, is it not, that he wants to marry that English
miss?"

Poirot coughed.

"_On m'a dit_," he murmured, "that he adores her passionately."

Mirelle came towards them.

"He murdered his wife," she screamed. "There--now you have it! He told
me beforehand that he meant to do it. He had got to an _impasse_--zut!
he took the easiest way out."

"You say that DerekKettering murdered his wife."

"Yes, yes, yes. Have I not told you so?"

"The police," murmured Poirot, "will need proof of that--er--statement."

"I tell you I saw him come out of her compartment that night on the
train."

"When?" asked Poirot sharply.

"Just before the train reached Lyons."

"You will swear to that, Mademoiselle?"

It was a different Poirot who spoke now, sharp and decisive.

"Yes."

There was a moment's silence. Mirelle was panting, and her eyes, half
defiant, half frightened, went from the face of one man to the other.

"This is a serious matter, Mademoiselle," said the detective. "You
realize how serious?"

"Certainly I do."

"That is well," said Poirot. "Then you understand, Mademoiselle, that
no time must be lost. You will, perhaps, accompany us immediately to
the office of the Examining Magistrate."

Mirelle was taken aback. She hesitated, but, as Poirot had foreseen,
she had no loophole for escape.

"Very well," she muttered. "I will fetch a coat."

Left alone together, Poirot and MajorKnighton exchanged glances.

"It is necessary to act while--how do you say it?--the iron is hot,"
murmured Poirot. "She is temperamental; in an hour's time, maybe, she
will repent, and she will wish to draw back. We must prevent that at
all costs."

Mirelle reappeared, wrapped in a sand-coloured velvet wrap trimmed with
leopard skin. She looked not altogether unlike a leopardess, tawny and
dangerous. Her eyes still flashed with anger and determination.

They found M. Caux and the Examining Magistrate together. A few
brief introductory words from Poirot, and Mademoiselle Mirelle was
courteously entreated to tell her tale. This she did in much the same
words as she had done to MajorKnighton and Poirot, though with far more
soberness of manner.

"This is an extraordinary story, Mademoiselle," said M. Carrège slowly.
He leant back in his chair, adjusted his pince-nez, and looked keenly
and searchingly at the dancer through them.

"You wish us to believe DerekKettering actually boasted of the crime to
you beforehand?"

"Yes, yes. She was too healthy, he said. If she were to die it must be
an accident--he would arrange it all."

"You are aware, Mademoiselle," said M. Carrège sternly, "that you are
making yourself out to be an accessory before the fact?"

"Me? But not the least in the world, Monsieur. Not for a moment did I
take that statement seriously. Ah no, indeed! I know men, Monsieur;
they say many wild things. It would be an odd state of affairs if one
were to take all they said _au pied de la lettre_."

The Examining Magistrate raised his eyebrows.

"We are to take it, then, that you regarded DerekKettering's threats as
mere idle words? May I ask, Mademoiselle, what made you throw up your
engagements in London and come out to the Riviera?"

Mirelle looked at him with melting black eyes.

"I wished to be with the man I loved," she said simply. "Was it so
unnatural?"

Poirot interpolated a question gently.

"Was it, then, at DerekKettering's wish that you accompanied him to Nice?"

Mirelle seemed to find a little difficulty in answering this. She
hesitated perceptibly before she spoke. When she did, it was with a
haughty indifference of manner.

"In such matters I please myself, Monsieur," she said.

That the answer was not an answer at all was noted by all three men.
They said nothing.

"When were you first convinced that DerekKettering had murdered his wife?"

"As I tell you, Monsieur, I saw DerekKettering come out of his wife's
compartment just before the train drew into Lyons. There was a look on
his face--ah! at the moment I could not understand it--a look haunted
and terrible. I shall never forget it."

Her voice rose shrilly, and she flung out her arms in an extravagant
gesture.

"Quite so," said M. Carrège.

"Afterwards, when I found that Madame Kettering was dead when the train
left Lyons, then--then I knew!"

"And still--you did not go to the police, Mademoiselle," said the
Commissary mildly.

Mirelle glanced at him superbly; she was clearly enjoying herself in
the rôle she was playing.

"Shall I betray my lover?" she asked. "Ah no; do not ask a woman to do
that."

"Yet now--" hinted M. Caux.

"Now it is different. He has betrayed me! Shall I suffer that in
silence...?"

The Examining Magistrate checked her.

"Quite so, quite so," he murmured soothingly. "And now, Mademoiselle,
perhaps you will read over the statement of what you have told us, see
that it is correct, and sign it."

Mirelle wasted no time on the document.

"Yes, yes," she said, "it is correct." She rose to her feet. "You
require me no longer, Messieurs?"

"At present, no, Mademoiselle."

"And Dereek will be arrested?"

"At once, Mademoiselle."

Mirelle laughed cruelly and drew her fur draperies closer about her.

"He should have thought of this before he insulted me," she cried.

"There is one little matter"--Poirot coughed apologetically--"just a
matter of detail."

"Yes?"

"What makes you think Madame Kettering was dead when the train left
Lyons?"

Mirelle stared.

"But she _was_ dead."

"Was she?"

"Yes, of course. I--"

She came to an abrupt stop. Poirot was regarding her intently, and he
saw the wary look that came into her eyes.

"I have been told so. Everybody says so."

"Oh," said Poirot, "I was not aware that the fact had been mentioned
outside the Examining Magistrate's office."

Mirelle appeared somewhat discomposed.

"One hears those things," she said vaguely; "they get about. Somebody
told me. I can't remember who it was."

She moved to the door. M. Caux sprang forward to open it for her, and
as he did so, Poirot's voice rose gently once more.

"And the jewels? Pardon, Mademoiselle. Can you tell me anything about
those?"

"The jewels? What jewels?"

"The rubies of Catherine the Great. Since you hear so much, you must
have heard of them."

"I know nothing about any jewels," said Mirelle sharply.

She went out, closing the door behind her. M. Caux came back to his
chair; the Examining Magistrate sighed.

"What a fury!" he said, "but _diablement chic_, I wonder if she is
telling the truth? I think so."

"There is _some_ truth in her story, certainly," said Poirot. "We have
confirmation of it from Miss Grey. She was looking down the corridor a
short time before the train reached Lyons and she saw DerekKettering go
into his wife's compartment."

"The case against him seems quite clear," said the Commissary, sighing;
"it is a thousand pities," he murmured.

"How do you mean?" asked Poirot.

"It has been the ambition of my life to lay the Comte de la Roche
by the heels. This time, _ma foi_, I thought we had got him. This
other--it is not nearly so satisfactory."

M. Carrège rubbed his nose.

"If anything goes wrong," he observed cautiously, "it will be most
awkward. DerekKettering is of the aristocracy. It will get into the
newspapers. If we have made a mistake--" He shrugged his shoulders
forebodingly.

"The jewels now," said the Commissary, "what do you think he has done
with them?"

"He took them for a plant, of course," said M. Carrège; "they must have
been a great inconvenience to him and very awkward to dispose of."

Poirot smiled.

"I have an idea of my own about the jewels. Tell me, Messieurs, what do
you know of a man called the Marquis?"

The Commissary leant forward excitedly.

"The Marquis," he said, "the Marquis? Do you think he is mixed up in
this affair, M. Poirot?"

"I ask you what you know of him."

The Commissary made an expressive grimace.

"Not as much as we should like to," he observed ruefully. "He works
behind the scenes, you understand. He has underlings who do his dirty
work for him. But he is some one high up. That we are sure of. He does
not come from the criminal classes."

"A Frenchman?"

"Y--es. At least we believe so. But we are not sure. He has worked in
France, in England, in America. There was a series of robberies in
Switzerland last autumn which were laid at his door. By all accounts
he is a _grand seigneur_, speaking French and English with equal
perfection and his origin is a mystery."

Poirot nodded and rose to take his departure.

"Can you tell us nothing more, M. Poirot," urged the Commissary.

"At present, no," said Poirot, "but I may have news awaiting me at my
hotel."

M. Carrège looked uncomfortable. "If the Marquis is concerned in
this--" he began, and then stopped.

"It upsets our ideas," complained M. Caux.

"It does not upset mine," said Poirot. "On the contrary, I think it
agrees with them very well. Au revoir, Messieurs; if news of any
importance comes to me I will communicate it to you immediately."

He walked back to his hotel with a grave face. In his absence a
telegram had come to him. Taking a paper-cutter from his pocket, he
slit it open. It was a long telegram, and he read it over twice before
slowly putting it in his pocket. Upstairs, George was awaiting his
master.

"I am fatigued, Georges, much fatigued. Will you order for me a small
pot of chocolate?"

The chocolate was duly ordered and brought, and George set it at the
little table at his master's elbow. As he was preparing to retire,
Poirot spoke:

"I believe, Georges, that you have a good knowledge of the English
aristocracy?" murmured Poirot.

George smiled apologetically.

"I think that I might say that I have, sir," he replied.

"I suppose that it is your opinion, Georges, that criminals are
invariably drawn from the lower orders."

"Not always, sir. There was great trouble with one of the Duke of
Devize's younger sons. He left Eton under a cloud, and after that he
caused great anxiety on several occasions. The police would not accept
the view that it was kleptomania. A very clever young gentleman, sir,
but vicious through and through, if you take my meaning. His Grace
shipped him to Australia, and I hear he was convicted out there under
another name. Very odd, sir, but there it is. The young gentleman, I
need hardly say, was not in want financially."

Poirot nodded his head slowly.

"Love of excitement," he murmured, "and a little kink in the brain
somewhere. I wonder now--"

He drew out the telegram from his pocket and read it again.

"Then there was Lady Mary Fox's daughter," continued the valet in a
mood of reminiscence. "Swindled tradespeople something shocking, she
did. Very worrying to the best families, if I may say so, and there are
many other queer cases I could mention."

"You have a wide experience, Georges," murmured Poirot. "I often
wonder having lived so exclusively with titled families that you
demean yourself by coming as a valet to me. I put it down to love of
excitement on your part."

"Not exactly, sir," said George. "I happened to see in _Society
Snippets_ that you had been received at Buckingham Palace. That was
just when I was looking for a new situation. His Majesty, so it said,
had been most gracious and friendly and thought very highly of your
abilities."

"Ah," said Poirot, "one always likes to know the reason for things."

He remained in thought for a few moments and then said:

"You rang up Mademoiselle Papopolous?"

"Yes, sir; she and her father will be pleased to dine with you
to-night."

"Ah," said Poirot thoughtfully. He drank off his chocolate, set the
cup and saucer neatly in the middle of the tray, and spoke gently, more
to himself than to the valet.

"The squirrel, my good Georges, collects nuts. He stores them up in
the autumn so that they may be of advantage to him later. To make a
success of humanity, Georges, we must profit by the lessons of those
below us in the animal kingdom. I have always done so. I have been the
cat, watching at the mouse hole. I have been the good dog following up
the scent, and not taking my nose from the trail. And also, my good
Georges, I have been the squirrel. I have stored away the little fact
here, the little fact there. I go now to my store and I take out one
particular nut, a nut that I stored away--let me see, seventeen years
ago. You follow me, Georges?"

"I should hardly have thought, sir," said George, "that nuts would have
kept so long as that, though I know one can do wonders with preserving
bottles."

Poirot looked at him and smiled.




                     28. Poirot Plays the Squirrel


Poirot started to keep his dinner appointment with a margin of
three-quarters of an hour to spare. He had an object in this. The car
took him, not straight to Monte Carlo, but to Lady Tamplin's house at
Cap Martin, where he asked for Miss Grey. The ladies were dressing and
Poirot was shown into a small salon to wait, and here, after a lapse of
three or four minutes, Lenox Tamplin came to him.

"Katherine is not quite ready yet," she said. "Can I give her a
message, or would you rather wait until she comes down?"

Poirot looked at her thoughtfully. He was a minute or two in replying,
as though something of great weight hung upon his decision. Apparently
the answer to such a simple question mattered.

"No," he said at last, "no, I do not think it is necessary that I
should wait to see Mademoiselle Katherine. I think, perhaps, that it is
better that I should not. These things are sometimes difficult."

Lenox waited politely, her eyebrows slightly raised.

"I have a piece of news," continued Poirot. "You will, perhaps, tell
your friend. DerekKettering was arrested to-night for the murder of his
wife."

"You want me to tell Katherine that?" asked Lenox. She breathed rather
hard, as though she had been running; her face, Poirot thought, looked
white and strained--rather noticeably so.

"If you please, Mademoiselle."

"Why?" said Lenox. "Do you think Katherine will be upset? Do you think
she cares?"

"I don't know, Mademoiselle," said Poirot. "See, I admit it frankly.
As a rule I know everything, but in this case, I--well, I do not. You,
perhaps, know better than I do."

"Yes," said Lenox, "I know--but I am not going to tell you all the
same."

She paused for a minute or two, her dark brows drawn together in a
frown.

"You believe he did it?" she said abruptly.

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

"The police say so."

"Ah," said Lenox, "hedging, are you? So there is something to hedge
about."

Again she was silent, frowning. Poirot said gently:

"You have known DerekKettering  a long time, have you not?"

"Off and on ever since I was a kid," said Lenox gruffly.

Poirot nodded his head several times without speaking.

With one of her brusque movements Lenox drew forward a chair and sat
down on it, her elbows on the table and her face supported by her
hands. Sitting thus, she looked directly across the table at Poirot.

"What have they got to go on?" she demanded. "Motive, I suppose.
Probably came into money at her death."

"He came into two million."

"And if she had not died he would have been ruined?"

"Yes."

"But there must have been more than that," persisted Lenox. "He
travelled by the same train, I know, but--that would not be enough to
go on by itself."

"A cigarette case with the letter 'K' on it which did not belong to
Mrs. Kettering was found in her carriage, and he was seen by two people
entering and leaving the compartment just before the train got into
Lyons."

"What two people?"

"Your friend Miss Grey was one of them. The other was Mademoiselle
Mirelle, the dancer."

"And he, DerekKettering, what has he got to say about it?" demanded Lenox
sharply.

"He denies having entered his wife's compartment at all," said Poirot.

"Fool!" said Lenox crisply, frowning. "Just before Lyons, you say? Does
nobody know when--when she died?"

"The doctors' evidence necessarily cannot be very definite," said
Poirot; "they are inclined to think that death was unlikely to have
occurred after leaving Lyons. And we know this much, that a few moments
after leaving Lyons Mrs. Kettering was dead."

"How do you know that?"

Poirot was smiling rather oddly to himself.

"Some one else went into her compartment and found her dead."

"And they did not rouse the train?"

"No."

"Why was that?"

"Doubtless they had their reasons."

Lenox looked at him sharply.

"Do you know the reason?"

"I think so--yes."

Lenox sat still turning things over in her mind. Poirot watched her in
silence. At last she looked up. A soft colour had come into her cheeks
and her eyes were shining.

"You think some one on the train must have killed her, but that need
not be so at all. What is to stop any one swinging themselves on to
the train when it stopped at Lyons? They could go straight to her
compartment, strangle her, and take the rubies and drop off the train
again without any one being the wiser. She may have been actually
killed while the train was in Lyons station. Then she would have been
alive when DerekKettering went in, and dead when the other person found her."

Poirot leant back in his chair. He drew a deep breath. He looked across
at the girl and nodded his head three times, then he heaved a sigh.

"Mademoiselle," he said, "what you have said there is very just--very
true. I was struggling in darkness, and you have shown me a light.
There was a point that puzzled me and you have made it plain."

He got up.

"And DerekKettering?" said Lenox.

"Who knows?" said Poirot, with a shrug of his shoulders. "But I will
tell you this, Mademoiselle. I am not satisfied; no, I, Hercule Poirot,
am not yet satisfied. It may be that this very night I shall learn
something more. At least, I go to try."

"You are meeting some one?"

"Yes."

"Some one who knows something?"

"Some one who might know something. In these matters one must leave no
stone unturned. Au revoir, Mademoiselle."

Lenox accompanied him to the door.

"Have I--helped?" she asked.

Poirot's face softened as he looked up at her standing on the doorstep
above him.

"Yes, Mademoiselle, you have helped. If things are very dark, always
remember that."

When the car had driven off he relapsed into a frowning absorption, but
in his eyes was that faint green light which was always the precursor
of the triumph to be.

He was a few minutes late at the rendezvous, and found that M.
Papopolous and his daughter had arrived before him. His apologies were
abject, and he outdid himself in politeness and small attentions.
The Greek was looking particularly benign and noble this evening, a
sorrowful patriarch of blameless life. Zia was looking handsome and
good humoured. The dinner was a pleasant one. Poirot was his best and
most sparkling self. He told anecdotes, he made jokes, he paid graceful
compliments to Zia Papopolous, and he told many interesting incidents
of his career. The menu was a carefully selected one, and the wine was
excellent.

At the close of dinner M. Papopolous inquired politely:

"And the tip I gave you? You have had your little flutter on the horse?"

"I am in communication with--er--my bookmaker," replied Poirot.

The eyes of the two men met.

"A well-known horse, eh?"

"No," said Poirot; "it is what our friends, the English, call a dark
horse."

"Ah!" said M. Papopolous thoughtfully.

"Now we must step across to the Casino and have our little flutter at
the roulette table," cried Poirot gaily.

At the Casino the party separated, Poirot devoting himself solely to
Zia, whilst Papopolous himself drifted away.

Poirot was not fortunate, but Zia had a run of good luck, and had soon
won a few thousand francs.

"It would be as well," she observed drily to Poirot, "if I stopped now."

Poirot's eyes twinkled.

"Superb!" he exclaimed. "You are the daughter of your father,
Mademoiselle Zia. To know when to stop. Ah! that is the art."

He looked round the rooms.

"I cannot see your father anywhere about," he remarked carelessly. "I
will fetch your cloak for you, Mademoiselle, and we will go out in the
gardens."

He did not, however, go straight to the cloak-room. His sharp eyes had
seen but a little while before the departure of M. Papopolous. He was
anxious to know what had become of the wily Greek. He ran him to earth
unexpectedly in the big entrance hall. He was standing by one of the
pillars, talking to a lady who had just arrived. The lady was Mirelle.

Poirot sidled unostentatiously round the room. He arrived at the other
side of the pillar, and unnoticed by the two who were talking together
in an animated fashion--or rather, that is to say, the dancer was
talking, Papopolous contributing an occasional monosyllable and a good
many expressive gestures.

"I tell you I must have time," the dancer was saying. "If you give me
time I will get the money."

"To wait"--the Greek shrugged his shoulders--"it is awkward."

"Only a very little while," pleaded the other. "Ah! but you must! A
week--ten days--that is all I ask. You can be sure of your affair. The
money will be forthcoming."

Papopolous shifted a little and looked round him uneasily--to find
Poirot almost at his elbow with a beaming innocent face.

"_Ah! vous voilà_, M. Papopolous. I have been looking for you. It
is permitted that I take Mademoiselle Zia for a little turn in the
gardens? Good evening, Mademoiselle." He bowed very low to Mirelle. "A
thousand pardons that I did not see you immediately."

The dancer accepted his greetings rather impatiently. She was clearly
annoyed at the interruption of her _tête-à-tête_. Poirot was quick
to take the hint. Papopolous had already murmured: "Certainly--but
certainly," and Poirot withdrew forthwith.

He fetched Zia's cloak, and together they strolled out into the gardens.

"This is where the suicides take place," said Zia.

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. "So it is said. Men are foolish, are
they not, Mademoiselle? To eat, to drink, to breathe the good air,
it is a very pleasant thing, Mademoiselle. One is foolish to leave
all that simply because one has no money--or because the heart aches.
_L'amour_, it causes many fatalities, does it not?"

Zia laughed.

"You should not laugh at love, Mademoiselle," said Poirot, shaking an
energetic forefinger at her. "You who are young and beautiful."

"Hardly that," said Zia; "you forget that I am thirty-three, M. Poirot.
I am frank with you, because it is no good being otherwise. As you told
my father, it is exactly seventeen years since you aided us in Paris
that time."

"When I look at you, it seems much less," said Poirot gallantly. "You
were then very much as you are now, Mademoiselle, a little thinner,
a little paler, a little more serious. Sixteen years old and fresh
from your pension. Not quite the _petite pensionnaire_, not quite a
woman. You were very delicious, very charming, Mademoiselle Zia; others
thought so too, without doubt."

"At sixteen," said Zia, "one is simple and a little fool."

"That may be," said Poirot, "yes, that well may be. At sixteen one is
credulous, is one not? One believes what one is told."

If he saw the quick sideways glance that the girl shot at him, he
pretended not to have done so. He continued dreamily: "It was a
curious affair that, altogether. Your father, Mademoiselle, has never
understood the true inwardness of it."

"No?"

"When he asked me for details, for explanations, I said to him thus:
'Without scandal, I have got back for you that which was lost. You must
ask no questions.' Do you know, Mademoiselle, why I said these things?"

"I have no idea," said the girl coldly.

"It was because I had a soft spot in my heart for a little
pensionnaire, so pale, so thin, so serious."

"I don't understand what you are talking about," cried Zia angrily.

"Do you not, Mademoiselle? Have you forgotten Antonio Pirezzio?"

He heard the quick intake of her breath--almost a gasp.

"He came to work as an assistant in the shop, but not thus could he
have got hold of what he wanted. An assistant can lift his eyes to
his master's daughter, can he not? If he is young and handsome with
a glib tongue. And since they cannot make love all the time, they
must occasionally talk of things that interest them both--such as
that very interesting thing which was temporarily in M. Papopolous'
possession. And since, as you say, Mademoiselle, the young are foolish
and credulous, it was easy to believe him and to give him a sight of
that particular thing, to show him where it was kept. And afterwards
when it is gone--when the unbelievable catastrophe has happened. Alas!
the poor little pensionnaire. What a terrible position she is in. She
is frightened, the poor little one. To speak or not to speak? And
then there comes along that excellent fellow, Hercule Poirot. Almost
a miracle it must have been, the way things arranged themselves. The
priceless heirlooms are restored and there are no awkward questions."

Zia turned on him fiercely.

"You have known all the time? Who told you? Was it--was it Antonio?"

Poirot shook his head.

"No one told me," he said quietly. "I guessed. It was a good guess, was
it not, Mademoiselle? You see, unless you are good at guessing, it is
not much use being a detective."

The girl walked along beside him for some minutes in silence. Then she
said in a hard voice:

"Well, what are you going to do about it, are you going to tell my
father?"

"No," said Poirot sharply. "Certainly not."

She looked at him curiously.

"You want something from me?"

"I want your help, Mademoiselle."

"What makes you think that I can help you?"

"I do not think so. I only hope so."

"And if I do not help you, then--you will tell my father?"

"But no, but no! Debarrass yourself of that idea, Mademoiselle. I
am not a blackmailer. I do not hold your secret over your head and
threaten you with it."

"If I refuse to help you--" began the girl slowly.

"Then you refuse, and that is that."

"Then why--" she stopped.

"Listen, and I will tell you why. Women, Mademoiselle, are generous. If
they can render a service to one who has rendered a service to them,
they will do it. I was generous once to you, Mademoiselle. When I might
have spoken, I held my tongue."

There was another silence; then the girl said, "My father gave you a
hint the other day."

"It was very kind of him."

"I do not think," said Zia slowly, "that there is anything that I can
add to that."

If Poirot was disappointed he did not show it. Not a muscle of his face
changed.

"_Eh bien!_" he said cheerfully, "then we must talk of other things."

And he proceeded to chat gaily. The girl was _distraite_, however, and
her answers were mechanical and not always to the point. It was when
they were approaching the Casino once more that she seemed to come to a
decision.

"M. Poirot?"

"Yes, Mademoiselle?"

"I--I should like to help you if I could."

"You are very amiable, Mademoiselle--very amiable."

Again there was a pause. Poirot did not press her. He was quite content
to wait and let her take her own time.

"Ah bah," said Zia, "after all, why should I not tell you? My father is
cautious--always cautious in everything he says. But I know that with
you it is not necessary. You have told us it is only the murderer you
seek, and that you are not concerned over the jewels. I believe you.
You were quite right when you guessed that we were in Nice because
of the rubies. They have been handed over here according to plan. My
father has them now. He gave you a hint the other day as to who our
mysterious client was."

"The Marquis?" murmured Poirot softly.

"Yes, the Marquis."

"Have you ever seen the Marquis, Mademoiselle Zia?"

"Once," said the girl. "But not very well," she added. "It was through
a keyhole."

"That always presents difficulties," said Poirot sympathetically, "but
all the same you saw him. You would know him again?"

Zia shook her head.

"He wore a mask," she explained.

"Young or old?"

"He had white hair. It may have been a wig, it may not. It fitted very
well. But I do not think he was old. His walk was young, and so was his
voice."

"His voice?" said Poirot thoughtfully. "Ah, his voice! Would you know
it again, Mademoiselle Zia?"

"I might," said the girl.

"You were interested in him, eh? It was that that took you to the
keyhole."

Zia nodded.

"Yes, yes. I was curious. One had heard so much--he is not the ordinary
thief--he is more like a figure of history or romance."

"Yes," said Poirot thoughtfully, "yes; perhaps so."

"But it is not this that I meant to tell you," said Zia. "It was just
one other little fact that I thought might be--well--useful to you."

"Yes?" said Poirot encouragingly.

"The rubies, as I say, were handed over to my father here at Nice. I
did not see the person who handed them over, but--"

"Yes?"

"I know one thing. _It was a woman._"




                        29. A Letter From Home


    "_Dear Katherine--Living among grand friends as you are doing now,
    I don't suppose you will care to hear any of our news; but as I
    always thought you were a sensible girl, perhaps you are a trifle
    less swollen-headed than I suppose. Everything goes on much the
    same here. There was great trouble about the new curate, who is
    scandalously high. In my view, he is neither more nor less than a
    Roman. Everybody has spoken to the Vicar about it, but you know
    what the Vicar is--all Christian charity and no proper spirit. I
    have had a lot of trouble with maids lately. That girl Annie was
    no good--skirts up to her knees and wouldn't wear sensible woollen
    stockings. Not one of them can bear being spoken to. I have had a
    lot of pain with my rheumatism one way and another, and Dr. Harris
    persuaded me to go and see a London specialist--a waste of three
    guineas and a railway fare, as I told him; but by waiting until
    Wednesday I managed to get a cheap return. The London doctor pulled
    a long face and talked all round about and never straight out,
    until I said to him, 'I'm a plain woman, Doctor, and I like things
    to be plainly stated. Is it cancer, or is it not?' And then, of
    course, he had to say it was. They say a year with care, and not
    too much pain, though I am sure I can bear pain as well as any
    other Christian woman. Life seems rather lonely at times, with most
    of my friends dead or gone before. I wish you were in St. Mary
    Mead, my dear, and that is a fact. If you hadn't come into this
    money and gone off into grand society, I would have offered you
    double the salary poor  gave you to come and look after me;
    but there--there's no good wanting what we can't get. However, if
    things should go ill with you--and that is always possible. I have
    heard no end of tales of bogus noblemen marrying girls and getting
    hold of their money and then leaving them at the church door. I
    dare say you are too sensible for anything of the kind to happen to
    you, but one never knows; and never having had much attention of
    any kind it might easily go to your head now. So just in case, my
    dear, remember there is always a home for you here; and though a
    plain-spoken woman I am a warm-hearted one too.--Your affectionate
    old friend,_

                                                       "_Amelia Viner._

    "_P.S.--I saw a mention of you in the paper with your cousin,
    Viscountess Tamplin, and I cut it out and put it with my cuttings.
    I prayed for you on Sunday that you might be kept from pride and
    vainglory._"

Katherine read this characteristic epistle through twice, then she laid
it down and stared out of her bedroom window across the blue waters
of the Mediterranean. She felt a curious lump in her throat. A sudden
wave of longing for St. Mary Mead swept over her. So full of familiar,
everyday, stupid little things--and yet--home. She felt very inclined
to lay her head down on her arms and indulge in a real good cry.

Lenox, coming in at the moment, saved her.

"Hello, Katherine," said Lenox. "I say--what is the matter?"

"Nothing," said Katherine, grabbing up Miss Viner's letter and
thrusting it into her handbag.

"You looked rather queer," said Lenox. "I say--I hope you don't mind--I
rang up your detective friend, M. Poirot, and asked him to lunch with
us in Nice. I said you wanted to see him, as I thought he might not
come for me."

"Did you want to see him then?" asked Katherine.

"Yes," said Lenox. "I have rather lost my heart to him. I never met a
man before whose eyes were really green like a cat's."

"All right," said Katherine. She spoke listlessly. The last few days
had been trying. DerekKettering's arrest had been the topic of the
hour, and the Blue Train Mystery had been thrashed out from every
conceivable standpoint.

"I have ordered the car," said Lenox, "and I have told Mother some lie
or other--unfortunately I can't remember exactly what; but it won't
matter, as she never remembers. If she knew where we were going, she
would want to come too, to pump M. Poirot."

The two girls arrived at the Negresco to find Poirot waiting.

He was full of Gallic politeness, and showered so many compliments upon
the two girls that they were soon helpless with laughter; yet for all
that the meal was not a gay one. Katherine was dreamy and distracted,
and Lenox made bursts of conversation, interspersed by silences. As
they were sitting on the terrace sipping their coffee she suddenly
attacked Poirot bluntly.

"How are things going? You know what I mean?"

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. "They take their course," he said.

"And you are just letting them take their course?"

He looked at Lenox a little sadly.

"You are young, Mademoiselle, but there are three things that cannot be
hurried--_le bon Dieu_, Nature, and old people."

"Nonsense!" said Lenox. "You are not old."

"Ah, it is pretty what you say there."

"Here is MajorKnighton," said Lenox.

Katherine looked round quickly and then turned back again.

"He is with Mr. Van Aldin," continued Lenox. "There is something I want
to ask  MajorKnighton about. I won't be a minute."

Left alone together, Poirot bent forward and murmured to Katherine:

"You are _distraite_, Mademoiselle; your thoughts, they are far away,
are they not?"

"Just as far as England, no farther."

Guided by a sudden impulse, she took the letter she had received that
morning and handed it across to him to read.

"That is the first word that has come to me from my old life; somehow
or other--it hurts."

He read it through and then handed it back to her. "So you are going
back to St. Mary Mead?" he said slowly.

"No, I am not," said Katherine; "why should I?"

"Ah," said Poirot, "it is my mistake. You will excuse me one little
minute."

He strolled across to where Lenox Tamplin was talking to Van Aldin and
MajorKnighton. The American looked old and haggard. He greeted Poirot with a
curt nod but without any other sign of animation.

As he turned to reply to some observation made by Lenox, Poirot drew
MajorKnighton aside.

"M. Van Aldin looks ill," he said.

"Do you wonder?" asked MajorKnighton. "The scandal of DerekKettering's
arrest has about put the lid on things, as far as he is concerned. He
is even regretting that he asked you to find out the truth."

"He should go back to England," said Poirot.

"We are going the day after to-morrow."

"That is good news," said Poirot.

He hesitated, and looked across the terrace to where Katherine was
sitting.

"I wish," he murmured, "that you could tell Miss Grey that."

"Tell her what?"

"That you--I mean that M. Van Aldin is returning to England."

MajorKnighton looked a little puzzled, but he readily crossed the terrace
and joined Katherine.

Poirot saw him go with a satisfied nod of the head, and then joined
Lenox and the American. After a minute or two they joined the others.
Conversation was general for a few minutes, then the millionaire and
his secretary departed. Poirot also prepared to take his departure.

"A thousand thanks for your hospitality, Mesdemoiselles," he cried;
"it has been a most charming luncheon. _Ma foi_, I needed it!" He
swelled out his chest and thumped it. "I am now a lion--a giant. Ah,
Mademoiselle Katherine, you have not seen me as I can be. You have
seen the gentle, the calm Hercule Poirot; but there is another Hercule
Poirot. I go now to bully, to threaten, to strike terror into the
hearts of those who listen to me."

He looked at them in a self-satisfied way, and they both appeared to be
duly impressed, though Lenox was biting her under lip, and the corners
of Katherine's mouth had a suspicious twitch.

"And I shall do it," he said gravely. "Oh yes, I shall succeed."

He had gone but a few steps when Katherine's voice made him turn.

"M. Poirot, I--I want to tell you. I think you were right in what you
said. I am going back to England almost immediately."

Poirot stared at her very hard, and under the directness of his
scrutiny she blushed.

"I see," he said gravely.

"I don't believe you do," said Katherine.

"I know more than you think, Mademoiselle," he said quietly.

He left her, with an odd little smile upon his lips. Entering a waiting
car, he drove to Antibes.

Hippolyte, the Comte de la Roche's wooden-faced man-servant, was busy
at the Villa  polishing his master's beautiful cut table glass.
The Comte de la Roche himself had gone to Monte Carlo for the day.
Chancing to look out of the window, Hippolyte espied a visitor walking
briskly up to the hall door, a visitor of so uncommon a type that
Hippolyte, experienced as he was, had some difficulty in placing him.
Calling to his wife, Marie, who was busy in the kitchen, he drew her
attention to what he called _ce type là_.

"It is not the police again?" said Marie anxiously.

"Look for yourself," said Hippolyte.

Marie looked.

"Certainly not the police," she declared. "I am glad."

"They have not really worried us much," said Hippolyte. "In fact, but
for Monsieur le Comte's warning, I should never have guessed that
stranger at the wine-shop to be what he was."

The hall bell pealed and Hippolyte, in a grave and decorous manner,
went to open the door.

"M. le Comte, I regret to say, is not at home."

The little man with the large moustaches beamed placidly.

"I know that," he replied. "You are Hippolyte Flavelle, are you not?"

"Yes, Monsieur, that is my name."

"And you have a wife, Marie Flavelle?"

"Yes, Monsieur, but--"

"I desire to see you both," said the stranger, and he stepped nimbly
past Hippolyte into the hall.

"Your wife is doubtless in the kitchen," he said. "I will go there."

Before Hippolyte could recover his breath, the other had selected the
right door at the back of the hall and passed along the passage and
into the kitchen, where Marie paused open-mouthed to stare at him.

"_Voilà_," said the stranger, and sank into a wooden arm-chair; "I am
Hercule Poirot."

"Yes, Monsieur?"

"You do not know the name?"

"I have never heard it," said Hippolyte.

"Permit me to say that you have been badly educated. It is the name of
one of the great ones of this world."

He sighed and folded his hands across his chest.

Hippolyte and Marie were staring at him uneasily. They were at a loss
what to make of this unexpected and extremely strange visitor.

"Monsieur desires--" murmured Hippolyte mechanically.

"I desire to know why you have lied to the police."

"Monsieur!" cried Hippolyte; "I--lied to the police? Never have I done
such a thing."

M. Poirot shook his head.

"You are wrong," he said; "you have done it on several occasions. Let
me see." He took a small notebook from his pocket and consulted it.
"Ah, yes; on seven occasions at least. I will recite them to you."

In a gentle unemotional voice he proceeded to outline the seven
occasions.

Hippolyte was taken aback.

"But it is not of these past lapses that I wish to speak," continued
Poirot, "only, my dear friend, do not get into the habit of thinking
yourself too clever. I come now to the particular lie in which I am
concerned--your statement that the Comte de la Roche arrived at this
villa on the morning of 14th January."

"But that was no lie, Monsieur; that was the truth. Monsieur le Comte
arrived here on the morning of Tuesday, the 14th. That is so, Marie, is
it not?"

Marie assented eagerly.

"Ah, yes, that is quite right. I remember it perfectly."

"Ah," said Poirot, "and what did you give your good master for
_déjeuner_ that day?"

"I--" Marie paused, trying to collect herself.

"Odd," said Poirot, "how one remembers some things--and forgets others."

He leant forward and struck the table a blow with his fist; his eyes
flashed with anger.

"Yes, yes, it is as I say. You tell your lies and you think nobody
knows. But there are two people who know. Yes--two people. One is _le
bon Dieu_--"

He raised a hand to heaven, and then settling himself back in his chair
and shutting his eyelids, he murmured comfortably:

"And the other is Hercule Poirot."

"I assure you, Monsieur, you are completely mistaken. Monsieur le Comte
left Paris on Monday night--"

"True," said Poirot--"by the Rapide. I do not know where he broke
his journey. Perhaps you do not know that. What I do know is that he
arrived here on Wednesday morning, and not on Tuesday morning."

"Monsieur is mistaken," said Marie stolidly.

Poirot rose to his feet.

"Then the law must take its course," he murmured. "A pity."

"What do you mean, Monsieur?" asked Marie, with a shade of uneasiness.

"You will be arrested and held as accomplices concerned in the murder
of Mrs. Kettering, the English lady who was killed."

"Murder!"

The man's face had gone chalk white, his knees knocked together. Marie
dropped the rolling-pin and began to weep.

"But it is impossible--impossible. I thought--"

"Since you stick to your story, there is nothing to be said. I think
you are both foolish."

He was turning towards the door when an agitated voice arrested him.

"Monsieur, Monsieur, just a little moment. I--I had no idea that it was
anything of this kind. I--I thought it was just a matter concerning a
lady. There have been little awkwardnesses with the police over ladies
before. But murder--that is very different."

"I have no patience with you," cried Poirot. He turned round on them
and angrily shook his fist in Hippolyte's face. "Am I to stop here all
day, arguing with a couple of imbeciles thus? It is the truth I want.
If you will not give it to me, that is your look out. _For the last
time, when did Monsieur le Comte arrive at the Villa --Tuesday
morning or Wednesday morning?_"

"Wednesday," gasped the man, and behind him Marie nodded confirmation.

Poirot regarded them for a minute or two, then inclined his head
gravely.

"You are wise, my children," he said quietly. "Very nearly you were in
serious trouble."

He left the Villa , smiling to himself.

"One guess, confirmed," he murmured to himself. "Shall I take a chance
on the other?"

It was six o'clock when the card of Monsieur Hercule Poirot was
brought up to Mirelle. She stared at it for a moment or two, and then
nodded. When Poirot entered, he found her walking up and down the room
feverishly. She turned on him furiously.

"Well?" she cried. "Well? What is it now? Have you not tortured me
enough, all of you? Have you not made me betray my poor Dereek? What
more do you want?"

"Just one little question, Mademoiselle. After the train left Lyons,
when you entered Mrs. Kettering's compartment--"

"What is that?"

Poirot looked at her with an air of mild reproach and began again.

"I say when you entered Mrs. Kettering's compartment--"

"I never did."

"And found her--"

"I never did."

"_Ah, sacré!_"

He turned on her in a rage and shouted at her, so that she cowered back
before him.

"Will you lie to me? I tell you I know what happened as well as though
I had been there. You went into her compartment and you found her
dead. I tell you I know it. To lie to me is dangerous. Be careful,
Mademoiselle Mirelle."

Her eyes wavered beneath his gaze and fell.

"I--I didn't--" she began uncertainly and stopped.

"There is only one thing about which I wonder," said Poirot--"I wonder,
Mademoiselle, if you found what you were looking for or whether--"

"Whether what?"

"Or whether some one else had been before you."

"I will answer no more questions," screamed the dancer. She tore
herself away from Poirot's restraining hand, and flinging herself down
on the floor in a frenzy, she screamed and sobbed. A frightened maid
came rushing in.

Hercule Poirot shrugged his shoulders, raised his eyebrows, and quietly
left the room.

But he seemed satisfied.




                     30. Miss Viner Gives Judgment


Katherine looked out of Miss Viner's bedroom window. It was raining,
not violently, but with a quiet, well-bred persistence. The window
looked out on a strip of front garden with a path down to the gate and
neat little flower-beds on either side, where later roses and pinks and
blue hyacinths would bloom.

Miss Viner was lying in a large Victorian bedstead. A tray with the
remains of breakfast had been pushed to one side and she was busy
opening her correspondence and making various caustic comments upon it.

Katherine had an open letter in her hand and was reading it through for
the second time. It was dated from the Ritz Hotel, Paris.

    "_Chère Mademoiselle Katherine" (it began)--"I trust that you are
    in good health and that the return to the English winter has not
    proved too depressing. Me, I prosecute my inquiries with the utmost
    diligence. Do not think that it is the holiday that I take here.
    Very shortly I shall be in England, and I hope then to have the
    pleasure of meeting you once more. It shall be so, shall it not?
    On arrival in London I shall write to you. You remember that we
    are the colleagues in this affair? But indeed I think you know that
    very well._

    "_Be assured, Mademoiselle, of my most respectful and devoted
    sentiments._

                                                    "_Hercule Poirot._"

Katherine frowned slightly. It was as though something in the letter
puzzled and intrigued her.

"A choir boys' picnic indeed," came from Miss Viner. "Tommy Saunders
and Albert Dykes ought to be left behind, and I shan't subscribe to it
unless they are. What those two boys think they are doing in church on
Sundays I don't know. Tommy sang, 'O God, make speed to save us,' and
never opened his lips again, and if Albert Dykes wasn't sucking a mint
humbug, my nose is not what it is and always has been."

"I know, they are awful," agreed Katherine.

She opened her second letter, and a sudden flush came to her cheeks.
Miss Viner's voice in the room seemed to recede into the far distance.

When she came back to a sense of her surroundings Miss Viner was
bringing a long speech to a triumphant termination.

"And I said to her, 'Not at all. As it happens, Miss Grey is Lady
Tamplin's own cousin.' What do you think of that?"

"Were you fighting my battles for me? That was very sweet of you."

"You can put it that way if you like. There is nothing to me in a
title. Vicar's wife or no vicar's wife, that woman is a cat. Hinting
you had bought your way into Society."

"Perhaps she was not so very far wrong."

"And look at you," continued Miss Viner. "Have you come back a stuck-up
fine lady, as well you might have done? No, there you are, as sensible
as ever you were, with a pair of good Balbriggan stockings on and
sensible shoes. I spoke to Ellen about it only yesterday. 'Ellen,' I
said, 'you look at Miss Grey. She has been hobnobbing with some of the
greatest in the land, and does she go about as you do with skirts up to
her knees and silk stockings that ladder when you look at them, and the
most ridiculous shoes that ever I set eyes on?'"

Katherine smiled a little to herself; it had apparently been worth
while to conform to Miss Viner's prejudices. The old lady went on with
increasing gusto.

"It has been a great relief to me that you have not had your head
turned. Only the other day I was looking for my cuttings. I have
several about Lady Tamplin and her War Hospital and what not, but I
cannot lay my hand upon them. I wish you would look, my dear; your
eyesight is better than mine. They are all in a box in the bureau
drawer."

Katherine glanced down at the letter in her hand and was about to
speak, but checked herself, and going over to the bureau found the box
of cuttings and began to look over them. Since her return to St. Mary
Mead her heart had gone out to Miss Viner in admiration of the old
woman's stoicism and pluck. She felt that there was little she could
do for her old friend, but she knew from experience how much those
seemingly small trifles meant to old people.

"Here is one," she said presently. "'Viscountess Tamplin, who is
running her villa at Nice as an Officers' Hospital, has just been the
victim of a sensational robbery, her jewels having been stolen. Amongst
them were some very famous emeralds, heirlooms of the Tamplin family.'"

"Probably paste," said Miss Viner; "a lot of these Society women's
jewels are."

"Here is another," said Katherine. "A picture of her, 'A charming
camera study of Viscountess Tamplin with her little daughter Lenox.'"

"Let me look," said Miss Viner. "You can't see much of the child's
face, can you? But I dare say that is just as well. Things go by
contraries in this world and beautiful mothers have hideous children. I
dare say the photographer realized that to take the back of the child's
head was the best thing he could do for her."

Katherine laughed.

"'One of the smartest hostesses on the Riviera this season is
Viscountess Tamplin, who has a villa at Cap Martin. Her cousin, Miss
Grey, who recently inherited a vast fortune in a most romantic manner,
is staying with her there.'"

"That is the one I wanted," said Miss Viner. "I expect there has been
a picture of you in one of the papers that I have missed; you know the
kind of thing. Mrs. Somebody or other Jones-Williams, at the something
or other Point-to-point, usually carrying a shooting-stick and having
one foot lifted up in the air. It must be a trial to some of them to
see what they look like."

Katherine did not answer. She was smoothing out the cutting with her
finger, and her face had a puzzled, worried look. Then she drew the
second letter out of its envelope and mastered its contents once more.
She turned to her friend.

"Miss Viner? I wonder--there is a friend of mine, some one I met on the
Riviera, who wants very much to come down and see me here?"

"A man," said Miss Viner.

"Yes."

"Who is he?"

"He is secretary to Mr. Van Aldin, the American millionaire."

"What is his name?"

"MajorKnighton.."

"Hm--secretary to a millionaire. And wants to come down here. Now,
Katherine, I am going to say something to you for your own good. You
are a nice girl and a sensible girl, and though you have your head
screwed on the right way about most things, every woman makes a fool
of herself once in her life. Ten to one what this man is after is your
money."

With a gesture she arrested Katherine's reply. "I have been waiting
for something of this kind. What is a secretary to a millionaire? Nine
times out of ten it is a young man who likes living soft. A young
man with nice manners and a taste for luxury and no brains and no
enterprise, and if there is anything that is a softer job than being a
secretary to a millionaire it is marrying a rich woman for her money. I
am not saying that you might not be some man's fancy. But you are not
young, and though you have a very good complexion you are not a beauty,
and what I say to you is, don't make a fool of yourself; but if you
are determined to do so, do see that your money is properly tied up on
yourself. There, now I have finished. What have you got to say?"

"Nothing," said Katherine; "but would you mind if he did come to see
me?"

"I wash my hands of it," said Miss Viner. "I have done my duty, and
whatever happens now is on your own head. Would you like him to lunch
or to dinner? I dare say Ellen could manage dinner--that is, if she
didn't lose her head."

"Lunch would be very nice," said Katherine. "It is awfully kind of you,
Miss Viner. He asked me to ring him up, so I will do so and say that
we shall be pleased if he will lunch with us. He will motor down from
town."

"Ellen does a steak with grilled tomatoes pretty fairly," said Miss
Viner. "She doesn't do it well, but she does it better than anything
else. It is no good having a tart because she is heavy handed with
pastry; but her little castle puddings are not bad, and I dare say you
could find a nice piece of Stilton at Abbot's. I have always heard that
gentlemen like a nice piece of Stilton, and there is a good deal of
father's wine left, a bottle of sparkling Moselle, perhaps."

"Oh, no, Miss Viner; that is really not necessary."

"Nonsense, my child. No gentleman is happy unless he drinks something
with his meal. There is some good prewar whisky if you think he
would prefer that. Now do as I say and don't argue. The key of the
wine-cellar is in the third drawer down in the dressing-table, in the
second pair of stockings on the left-hand side."

Katherine went obediently to the spot indicated.

"The second pair, now mind," said Miss Viner. "The first pair has my
diamond earrings and my filigree brooch in it."

"Oh," said Katherine, rather taken aback, "wouldn't you like them put
in your jewel-case?"

Miss Viner gave vent to a terrific and prolonged snort.

"No, indeed! I have much too much sense for that sort of thing, thank
you. Dear, dear, I well remember how my poor father had a safe built in
downstairs. Pleased as Punch he was with it, and he said to my mother,
'Now, Mary, you bring me your jewels in their case every night and I
will lock them away for you.' My mother was a very tactful woman, and
she knew that gentlemen like having their own way, and she brought him
the jewel-case locked up just as he said.

"And one night burglars broke in, and of course--naturally--the first
thing they went for was the safe! It would be, with my father talking
up and down the village and bragging about it until you might have
thought he kept all King Solomon's diamonds there. They made a clean
sweep, got the tankards, the silver cups, and the presentation gold
plate that my father had had presented to him, _and_ the jewel-case."

She sighed reminiscently. "My father was in a great state over my
mother's jewels. There was the Venetian set and some very fine cameos
and some pale pink corals, and two diamond rings with quite large
stones in them. And then, of course, she had to tell him that, being
a sensible woman, she had kept her jewellery rolled up in a pair of
corsets, and there it was still as safe as anything."

"And the jewel-case had been quite empty?"

"Oh no, dear," said Miss Viner, "it would have been too light a weight
then. My mother was a very intelligent woman; she saw to that. She
kept her buttons in the jewel-case, and a very handy place it was.
Boot buttons in the top tray, trouser buttons in the second tray, and
assorted buttons below. Curiously enough, my father was quite annoyed
with her. He said he didn't like deceit. But I mustn't go chattering
on; you want to go and ring up your friend, and mind you choose a
nice piece of steak, and tell Ellen she is not to have holes in her
stockings when she waits at lunch."

"Is her name Ellen or Helen, Miss Viner? I thought--"

Miss Viner closed her eyes.

"I can sound my h's, dear, as well as any one, but Helen is _not_ a
suitable name for a servant. I don't know what the mothers in the lower
classes are coming to nowadays."

The rain had cleared away when MajorKnighton arrived at the cottage. The
pale fitful sunshine shone down on it and burnished Katherine's head
as she stood in the doorway to welcome him. He came up to her quickly,
almost boyishly.

"I say, I hope you don't mind. I simply had to see you again soon. I
hope the friend you are staying with does not mind."

"Come in and make friends with her," said Katherine. "She can be most
alarming, but you will soon find that she has the softest heart in the
world."

Miss Viner was enthroned majestically in the drawing-room, wearing a
complete set of the cameos which had been so providentially preserved
in the family. She greeted MajorKnighton with dignity and an austere
politeness which would have damped many men. MajorKnighton, however, had a
charm of manner which was not easily set aside, and after about ten
minutes Miss Viner thawed perceptibly. Luncheon was a merry meal, and
Ellen, or Helen, in a new pair of silk stockings devoid of ladders
performed prodigies of waiting. Afterwards, Katherine and MajorKnighton went
for a walk and they came back to have tea _tête-à-tête_, since Miss
Viner had gone to lie down.

When the car had finally driven off Katherine went slowly upstairs. A
voice called her and she went in to Miss Viner's bedroom.

"Friend gone?"

"Yes. Thank you so much for letting me ask him down."

"No need to thank me. Do you think I am the sort of old curmudgeon who
never will do anything for anybody?"

"I think you are a dear," said Katherine affectionately.

"Humph," said Miss Viner mollified.

As Katherine was leaving the room she called her back.

"Katherine?"

"Yes."

"I was wrong about that young man of yours. A man when he is making up
to anybody can be cordial and gallant and full of little attentions
and altogether charming. But when a man is really in love he can't
help looking like a sheep. Now, whenever that young man looked at you
he looked like a sheep. I take back all I said this morning. It is
genuine."




                        31. Mr. Aarons Lunches


"Ah!" said Mr. Joseph Aarons, appreciatively.

He took a long draught from his tankard, set it down with a sigh, wiped
the froth from his lips, and beamed across the table at his host,
Monsieur Hercule Poirot.

"Give me," said Mr. Aarons, "a good Porterhouse steak and a tankard of
something worth drinking, and any one can have your French fallals and
whatnots, your ordoovres and your omelettes and your little bits of
quail. Give me," he reiterated, "a Porterhouse steak."

Poirot, who had just complied with this request, smiled sympathetically.

"Not that there is much wrong with a steak and kidney pudding,"
continued Mr. Aarons. "Apple tart? Yes, I will take apple tart, thank
you, Miss, and a jug of cream."

The meal proceeded. Finally, with a long sigh, Mr. Aarons laid down his
spoon and fork preparatory to toying with some cheese before turning
his mind to other matters.

"There was a little matter of business I think you said, Monsieur
Poirot," he remarked. "Anything I can do to help you I am sure I shall
be most happy."

"That is very kind of you," said Poirot. "I said to myself, 'If you
want to know anything about the dramatic profession there is one person
who knows all that is to be known and that is my old friend, Mr. Joseph
Aarons.'"

"And you don't say far wrong," said Mr. Aarons complacently; "whether
it is past, present, or future, Joe Aarons is the man to come to."

"_Précisément._ Now I want to ask you, Monsieur Aarons, what you know
about a young woman called Kidd."

"Kidd? Kitty Kidd?"

"Kitty Kidd."

"Pretty smart, she was. Male impersonator, song and a dance--That one?"

"That is the one."

"_Very_ smart, she was. Made a good income. Never out of an engagement.
Male impersonation mostly, but, as a matter of fact, you could not
touch her as a character actress."

"So I have heard," said Poirot; "but she has not been appearing lately,
has she?"

"No. Dropped right out of things. Went over to France and took up with
some swell nobleman there. She quitted the stage then for good and all,
I guess."

"How long ago was that?"

"Let me see. Three years ago. And she has been a loss--let me tell you
that."

"She was clever?"

"Clever as a cartload of monkeys."

"You don't know the name of the man she became friends with in Paris?"

"He was a swell, I know that. A Count--or was it a Marquis? Now I come
to think of it, I believe it was a Marquis."

"And you know nothing about her since?"

"Nothing. Never even run across her accidentally like. I bet she is
tooling it round some of these foreign resorts. Being a Marquise to the
life. You couldn't put one over on Kitty. She would give as good as she
got any day."

"I see," said Poirot thoughtfully.

"I am sorry I can't tell you more, Monsieur Poirot," said the other. "I
would like to be of use to you if I could. You did me a good turn once."

"Ah, but we are quits on that; you, too, did me a good turn."

"One good turn deserves another. Ha, ha!" said Mr. Aarons.

"Your profession must be a very interesting one," said Poirot.

"So-so," said Mr. Aarons non-committally. "Taking the rough with
the smooth, it is all right. I don't do so badly at it, all things
considered, but you have to keep your eyes skinned. Never know what the
public will jump for next."

"Dancing has come very much to the fore in the last few years,"
murmured Poirot reflectively.

"_I_ never saw anything in this Russian ballet, but people like it. Too
highbrow for me."

"I met one dancer out on the Riviera--Mademoiselle Mirelle."

"Mirelle? She is hot stuff, by all accounts. There is always money
going to back her--though, so far as that goes, the girl can dance; I
have seen her, and I know what I am talking about. I never had much to
do with her myself, but I hear she is a terror to deal with. Tempers
and tantrums all the time."

"Yes," said Poirot thoughtfully; "yes, so I should imagine."

"Temperament!" said Mr. Aarons, "temperament! That is what they call
it themselves. My missus was a dancer before she married me, but I
am thankful to say she never had any temperament. You don't want
temperament in the home, Monsieur Poirot."

"I agree with you, my friend; it is out of place there."

"A woman should be calm and sympathetic, and a good cook," said Mr.
Aarons.

"Mirelle has not been long before the public, has she?" asked Poirot.

"About two and a half years, that is all," said Mr. Aarons. "Some
French Duke started her. I hear now that she has taken up with the
ex-Prime Minister of Greece. These are the chaps who manage to put
money away quietly."

"That is news to me," said Poirot.

"Oh, she's not one to let the grass grow under her feet. They say that
young DerekKettering murdered his wife on her account. I don't know, I am
sure. Anyway, he is in prison, and she had to look round for herself,
and pretty smart she has been about it. They say she is wearing a ruby
the size of a pigeon's egg--not that I have ever seen a pigeon's egg
myself, but that is what they always call it in works of fiction."

"A ruby the size of a pigeon's egg!" said Poirot. His eyes were green
and cat-like. "How interesting!"

"I had it from a friend of mine," said Mr. Aarons. "But, for all
I know, it may be coloured glass. They are all the same, these
women--they never stop telling tall stories about their jewels. Mirelle
goes about bragging that it has got a curse on it. 'Heart of Fire,' I
think she calls it."

"But if I remember rightly," said Poirot, "the ruby that is named
'Heart of Fire' is the centre stone in a necklace."

"There you are! Didn't I tell you there is no end to the lies women
will tell about their jewellery? This is a single stone, hung on a
platinum chain round her neck; but, as I said before, ten to one it is
a bit of coloured glass."

"No," said Poirot gently; "no--somehow I do not think it is coloured
glass."




                32. Katherine and Poirot Compare Notes


"You have changed, Mademoiselle," said Poirot suddenly. He and
Katherine were seated opposite each other at a small table at the Savoy.

"Yes, you have changed," he continued.

"In what way?"

"Mademoiselle, these _nuances_ are difficult to express."

"I am older."

"Yes, you are older. And by that I do not mean that the wrinkles and
the crows' feet are coming. When I first saw you, Mademoiselle, you
were a looker-on at life. You had the quiet, amused look of one who
sits back in the stalls and watches the play."

"And now?"

"Now, you no longer watch. It is an absurd thing, perhaps, that I
say here, but you have the wary look of a fighter who is playing a
difficult game."

"My old lady is difficult sometimes," said Katherine, with a smile;
"but I can assure you that I don't engage in deadly contests with her.
You must go down and see her some day, Monsieur Poirot. I think you are
one of the people who would appreciate her pluck and her spirit."

There was a silence while the waiter deftly served them with chicken
_en casserole_. When he had departed, Poirot said:

"You have heard me speak of my friend Hastings?--he who said that I was
a human oyster. _Eh bien_, Mademoiselle, I have met my match in you.
You, far more than I, play a lone hand."

"Nonsense," said Katherine lightly.

"Never does Hercule Poirot talk nonsense. It is as I say."

Again there was a silence. Poirot broke it by inquiring:

"Have you seen any of our Riviera friends since you have been back,
Mademoiselle?"

"I have seen something of MajorKnighton."

"A-ha! Is that so?"

Something in Poirot's twinkling eyes made Katherine lower hers.

"So Mr. Van Aldin remains in London?"

"Yes."

"I must try to see him to-morrow or the next day."

"You have news for him?"

"What makes you think that?"

"I--wondered, that is all."

Poirot looked across at her with twinkling eyes.

"And now, Mademoiselle, there is much that you wish to ask me, I can
see that. And why not? Is not the affair of the Blue Train our own
'Roman Policier'?"

"Yes, there are things I should like to ask you."

"_Eh bien?_"

Katherine looked up with a sudden air of resolution.

"What were you doing in Paris, Monsieur Poirot?"

Poirot smiled slightly.

"I made a call at the Russian Embassy."

"Oh."

"I see that that tells you nothing. But I will not be a human oyster.
No, I will lay my cards on the table, which is assuredly a thing that
oysters do not do. You suspect, do you not, that I am not satisfied
with the case against DerekKettering?"

"That is what I have been wondering. I thought, in Nice, that you had
finished with the case."

"You do not say all that you mean, Mademoiselle. But I admit
everything. It was I--my researches--which placed DerekKettering where he is now. But for me the Examining Magistrate would still
be vainly trying to fasten the crime on the Comte de la Roche. _Eh
bien_, Mademoiselle, what I have done I do not regret. I have only
one duty--to discover the truth, and that way led straight to DerekKettering. But did it end there? The police say yes, but I, Hercule
Poirot, am not satisfied."

He broke off suddenly. "Tell me, Mademoiselle, have you heard from
Mademoiselle Lenox lately?"

"One very short, scrappy letter. She is, I think, annoyed with me for
coming back to England."

Poirot nodded.

"I had an interview with her the night that DerekKettering was
arrested. It was an interesting interview in more ways than one."

Again he fell silent, and Katherine did not interrupt his train of
thought.

"Mademoiselle," he said at last, "I am now on delicate ground, yet I
will say this to you. There is, I think, some one who loves DerekKettering--correct me if I am wrong--and for her sake--well--for her
sake I hope that I am right and the police are wrong. You know who that
some one is?"

There was a pause, then Katherine said:

"Yes--I think I know."

Poirot leant across the table towards her.

"I am not satisfied, Mademoiselle; no, I am not satisfied. The facts,
the main facts, led straight to DerekKettering. But there is one
thing that has been left out of account."

"And what is that?"

"The disfigured face of the victim. I have asked myself, Mademoiselle,
a hundred times, 'Was DerekKettering the kind of man who would deal
that smashing blow after having committed the murder?' What end would
it serve? What purpose would it accomplish? Was it a likely action for
one of DerekKettering's temperament? And, Mademoiselle, the answer
to these questions is profoundly unsatisfactory. Again and again I go
back to that one point--'why?' And the only things I have to help me to
a solution of the problem are these."

He whipped out his pocket-book and extracted something from it which he
held between his finger and thumb.

"Do you remember, Mademoiselle? You saw me take these hairs from the
rug in the railway carriage."

Katherine leant forward, scrutinizing the hairs keenly.

Poirot nodded his head slowly several times.

"They suggest nothing to you, I see that, Mademoiselle. And yet--I
think somehow that you see a good deal."

"I have had ideas," said Katherine slowly, "curious ideas. That is why
I ask you what you were doing in Paris, Monsieur Poirot."

"When I wrote to you--"

"From the Ritz?"

A curious smile came over Poirot's face.

"Yes, as you say, from the Ritz. I am a luxurious person
sometimes--when a millionaire pays."

"The Russian Embassy," said Katherine, frowning. "No, I don't see where
that comes in."

"It does not come in directly, Mademoiselle. I went there to get
certain information. I saw a particular personage and I threatened
him--yes, Mademoiselle, I, Hercule Poirot, threatened him."

"With the police?"

"No," said Poirot drily, "with the Press--a much more deadly weapon."

He looked at Katherine and she smiled at him, just shaking her head.

"Are you not just turning back into an oyster again, Monsieur Poirot?"

"No, no! I do not wish to make mysteries. See, I will tell you
everything. I suspect this man of being the active party in the sale
of the jewels of Monsieur Van Aldin. I tax him with it, and in the end
I get the whole story out of him. I learn where the jewels were handed
over, and I learn, too, of the man who paced up and down outside in the
street--a man with a venerable head of white hair, but who walked with
the light, springy step of a young man--and I give that man a name in
my own mind--the name of 'Monsieur le Marquis.'"

"And now you have come to London to see Mr. Van Aldin?"

"Not entirely for that reason. I had other work to do. Since I have
been in London I have seen two more people--a theatrical agent and a
Harley Street doctor. From each of them I have got certain information.
Put these things together, Mademoiselle, and see if you can make of
them the same as I do."

"I?"

"Yes, you. I will tell you one thing, Mademoiselle. There has been a
doubt all along in my mind as to whether the robbery and the murder
were done by the same person. For a long time I was not sure--"

"And now?"

"And now I _know_."

There was a silence. Then Katherine lifted her head. Her eyes were
shining.

"I am not clever like you, Monsieur Poirot. Half the things that you
have been telling me don't seem to me to point anywhere at all. The
ideas that came to me came from such an entirely different angle--"

"Ah, but that is always so," said Poirot quietly. "A mirror shows the
truth, but every one stands in a different place for looking into the
mirror."

"My ideas may be absurd--they may be entirely different from yours,
but--"

"Yes?"

"Tell me, does this help you at all?"

He took a newspaper cutting from her outstretched hand. He read it and,
looking up, he nodded gravely.

"As I told you, Mademoiselle, one stands at a different angle for
looking into the mirror, but it is the same mirror and the same things
are reflected there."

Katherine got up. "I must rush," she said. "I have only just time to
catch my train. Monsieur Poirot--"

"Yes, Mademoiselle."

"It--it mustn't be much longer, you understand. I--I can't go on much
longer."

There was a break in her voice.

He patted her hand reassuringly.

"Courage, Mademoiselle, you must not fail now; the end is very near."




                           33. A New Theory


"Monsieur Poirot wants to see you, sir."

"Damn the fellow!" said Van Aldin.

MajorKnighton remained sympathetically silent.

Van Aldin got up from his chair and paced up and down.

"I suppose you have seen the cursed newspapers this morning?"

"I have glanced at them, sir."

"Still at it hammer and tongs?"

"I am afraid so, sir."

The millionaire sat down again and pressed his hand to his forehead.

"If I had had an idea of this," he groaned. "I wish to God I had
never got that little Belgian to ferret out the truth. Find Ruth's
murderer--that was all I thought about."

"You wouldn't have liked your son-in-law to go scot free?"

Van Aldin sighed.

"I would have preferred to take the law into my own hands."

"I don't think that would have been a very wise proceeding, sir."

"All the same--are you sure the fellow wants to see me?"

"Yes, Mr. Van Aldin. He is very urgent about it."

"Then I suppose he will have to. He can come along this morning if he
likes."

It was a very fresh and debonair Poirot who was ushered in. He did
not seem to see any lack of cordiality in the millionaire's manner,
and chatted pleasantly about various trifles. He was in London, he
explained, to see his doctor. He mentioned the name of an eminent
surgeon.

"No, no, _pas la guerre_--a memory of my days in the police force, a
bullet of a rascally Apache."

He touched his left shoulder and winced realistically.

"I always consider you a lucky man, Monsieur Van Aldin; you are
not like our popular idea of American millionaires, martyrs to the
dyspepsia."

"I am pretty tough," said Van Aldin. "I lead a very simple life, you
know; plain fare and not too much of it."

"You have seen something of Miss Grey, have you not?" inquired Poirot,
innocently turning to the secretary.

"I--yes; once or twice," said MajorKnighton.

He blushed slightly and Van Aldin exclaimed in surprise:

"Funny you never mentioned to me that you had seen her, MajorKnighton?"

"I didn't think you would be interested, sir."

"I like that girl very much," said Van Aldin.

"It is a thousand pities that she should have buried herself once more
in St. Mary Mead," said Poirot.

"It is very fine of her," said MajorKnighton hotly. "There are very
few people who would bury themselves down there to look after a
cantankerous old woman who has no earthly claim on her."

"I am silent," said Poirot, his eyes twinkling a little; "but all the
same I say it is a pity. And now, Messieurs, let us come to business."

Both the other men looked at him in some surprise.

"You must not be shocked or alarmed at what I am about to say.
Supposing, Monsieur Van Aldin, that, after all, DerekKettering
did not murder his wife?"

"What?"

Both men stared at him in blank surprise.

"Supposing, I say, that DerekKettering did not murder his wife?"

"Are you mad, Monsieur Poirot?"

It was Van Aldin who spoke.

"No," said Poirot, "I am not mad. I am eccentric, perhaps--at least
certain people say so; but as regards my profession, I am very much, as
one says, 'all there.' I ask you, Monsieur Van Aldin, whether you would
be glad or sorry if what I tell you should be the case?"

Van Aldin stared at him.

"Naturally I should be glad," he said at last. "Is this an exercise in
suppositions, Monsieur Poirot, or are there any facts behind it?"

Poirot looked at the ceiling.

"There is an off-chance," he said quietly, "that it might be the Comte
de la Roche after all. At least I have succeeded in upsetting his
alibi."

"How did you manage that?"

Poirot shrugged his shoulders modestly.

"I have my own methods. The exercise of a little tact, a little
cleverness--and the thing is done."

"But the rubies," said Van Aldin, "these rubies that the Count had in
his possession were false."

"And clearly he would not have committed the crime except for the
rubies. But you are overlooking one point, Monsieur Van Aldin. Where
the rubies were concerned, some one might have been before him."

"But this is an entirely new theory," cried MajorKnighton.

"Do you really believe all this rigmarole, Monsieur Poirot?" demanded
the millionaire.

"The thing is not proved," said Poirot quietly. "It is as yet only a
theory, but I tell you this, Monsieur Van Aldin, the facts are worth
investigating. You must come out with me to the south of France and go
into the case on the spot."

"You really think this is necessary--that I should go, I mean."

"I thought it would be what you yourself would wish," said Poirot.

There was a hint of reproach in his tone which was not lost upon the
other.

"Yes, yes, of course," he said. "When do you wish to start, Monsieur
Poirot?"

"You are very busy at present, sir," murmured MajorKnighton.

But the millionaire had now made up his mind, and he waved the other's
objections aside.

"I guess this business comes first," he said. "All right, Monsieur
Poirot, to-morrow. What train?"

"We will go, I think, by the Blue Train," said Poirot, and he smiled.




                       34. The Blue Train Again


"The Millionaire's Train," as it is sometimes called, swung round a
curve of line at what seemed a dangerous speed. Van Aldin, MajorKnighton,
and Poirot sat together in silence. MajorKnighton and Van Aldin had two
compartments connecting with each other, as Ruth Kettering and her maid
had had on the fateful journey. Poirot's own compartment was further
along the coach.

The journey was a painful one for Van Aldin, recalling as it did the
most agonizing memories. Poirot and MajorKnighton conversed occasionally in
low tones without disturbing him.

When, however, the train had completed its slow journey round the
_ceinture_ and reached the Gare de Lyon, Poirot became suddenly
galvanized into activity. Van Aldin realized that part of his object in
travelling by the train had been to attempt to reconstruct the crime.
Poirot himself acted every part. He was in turn the maid, hurriedly
shut into her own compartment, Mrs. Kettering, recognizing her husband
with surprise and a trace of anxiety, and DerekKettering discovering
that his wife was travelling on the train. He tested various
possibilities, such as the best way for a person to conceal himself in
the second compartment.

Then suddenly an idea seemed to strike him. He clutched at Van Aldin's
arm.

"_Mon Dieu_, but that is something I have not thought of! We must break
our journey in Paris. Quick, quick, let us alight at once."

Seizing suit-cases he hurried from the train. Van Aldin and MajorKnighton,
bewildered but obedient, followed him. Van Aldin having once formed his
opinion of Poirot's ability was slow to part from it. At the barrier
they were held up. Their tickets were in charge of the conductor of the
train, a fact which all three of them had forgotten.

Poirot's explanations were rapid, fluent, and impassioned, but they
produced no effect upon the stolid-faced official.

"Let us get quit of this," said Van Aldin abruptly. "I gather you are
in a hurry, Monsieur Poirot. For God's sake pay the fares from Calais
and let us get right on with whatever you have got in your mind."

But Poirot's flood of language had suddenly stopped dead, and he had
the appearance of a man turned to stone. His arm, still outflung in an
impassioned gesture, remained there as though stricken with paralysis.

"I have been an imbecile," he said simply. "_Ma foi_, I lose my
head nowadays. Let us return and continue our journey quietly. With
reasonable luck the train will not have gone."

They were only just in time, the train moving off as MajorKnighton, the last
of the three, swung himself and his suitcase on board.

The conductor remonstrated with them feelingly, and assisted them to
carry their luggage back to their compartments. Van Aldin said nothing,
but he was clearly disgusted at Poirot's extraordinary conduct. Alone
with MajorKnighton for a moment or two, he remarked:

"This is a wildgoose chase. The man has lost his grip on things. He has
got brains up to a point, but any man who loses his head and scuttles
round like a frightened rabbit is no earthly darned good."

Poirot came to them in a moment or two, full of abject apologies and
clearly so crestfallen that harsh words would have been superfluous.
Van Aldin received his apologies gravely, but managed to restrain
himself from making acid comments.

They had dinner on the train, and afterwards, somewhat to the surprise
of the other two, Poirot suggested that they should all three set up in
Van Aldin's compartment.

The millionaire looked at him curiously.

"Is there anything that you are keeping back from us, Monsieur Poirot?"

"I?" Poirot opened his eyes in innocent surprise. "But what an idea."

Van Aldin did not answer, but he was not satisfied. The conductor was
told that he need not make up the beds. Any surprise he might have felt
was obliterated by the largeness of the tip which Van Aldin handed to
him. The three men sat in silence. Poirot fidgeted and seemed restless.
Presently he turned to the secretary.

"MajorKnighton, is the door of your compartment bolted? The door into
the corridor, I mean."

"Yes; I bolted it myself just now."

"Are you sure?" said Poirot.

"I will go and make sure, if you like," said MajorKnighton smiling.

"No, no, do not derange yourself. I will see for myself."

He passed through the connecting door and returned in a second or two,
nodding his head.

"Yes, yes, it is as you said. You must pardon an old man's fussy ways."

He closed the connecting door and resumed his place in the right-hand
corner.

The hours passed. The three men dozed fitfully, waking with
uncomfortable starts. Probably never before had three people booked
berths on the most luxurious train available, then declined to avail
themselves of the accommodations they had paid for. Every now and then
Poirot glanced at his watch, and then nodded his head and composed
himself to slumber once more. On one occasion he rose from his seat
and opened the connecting door, peered sharply into the adjoining
compartment, and then returned to his seat, shaking his head.

"What is the matter?" whispered MajorKnighton. "You are expecting something
to happen, aren't you?"

"I have the nerves," confessed Poirot. "I am like the cat upon the hot
tiles. Every little noise it makes me jump."

MajorKnighton yawned.

"Of all the darned uncomfortable journeys," he murmured. "I suppose you
know what you are playing at, Monsieur Poirot."

He composed himself to sleep as best he could. Both he and Van Aldin
had succumbed to slumber, when Poirot, glancing for the fourteenth time
at his watch, leant across and tapped the millionaire on the shoulder.

"Eh? What is it?"

"In five or ten minutes, Monsieur, we shall arrive at Lyons."

"My God!" Van Aldin's face looked white and haggard in the dim light.
"Then it must have been about this time that poor Ruth was killed."

He sat staring straight in front of him. His lips twitched a little,
his mind reverting back to the terrible tragedy that had saddened his
life.

There was the usual long screaming sigh of the brake, and the train
slackened speed and drew into Lyons. Van Aldin let down the window and
leant out.

"If it wasn't DerekKettering--if your new theory is correct, it is here that the
man left the train?" he asked over his shoulder.

Rather to his surprise Poirot shook his head.

"No," he said thoughtfully, "no _man_ left the train, but I think--yes,
I think, a _woman_ may have done so."

MajorKnighton gave a gasp.

"A woman?" demanded Van Aldin sharply.

"Yes, a woman," said Poirot, nodding his head. "You may not remember,
Monsieur Van Aldin, but Miss Grey in her evidence mentioned that a
youth in a cap and overcoat descended on to the platform ostensibly
to stretch his legs. Me, I think that that youth was most probably a
woman."

"But who was she?"

Van Aldin's face expressed incredulity, but Poirot replied seriously
and categorically.

"Her name--or the name under which she was known, for many years--is
Kitty Kidd, but you, Monsieur Van Aldin, knew her by another
name--_that of Ada AdaMason_."

MajorKnighton sprang to his feet.

"What?" he cried.

Poirot swung round to him.

"Ah!--before I forget it." He whipped something from a pocket and held
it out.

"Permit me to offer you a cigarette--out of your own cigarette case.
It was careless of you to drop it when you boarded the train on the
_ceinture_ at Paris."

MajorKnighton stood staring at him as though stupefied. Then he made a
movement, but Poirot flung up his hand in a warning gesture.

"No, don't move," he said in a silky voice; "the door into the next
compartment is open, and you are being covered from there this
minute. I unbolted the door into the corridor when we left Paris,
and our friends the police were told to take their places there. As
I expect you know, the French police want you rather urgently, MajorKnighton--or shall we say--Monsieur le Marquis?"




                           35. Explanations


"Explanations?"

Poirot smiled. He was sitting opposite the millionaire at a luncheon
table in the latter's private suite at the Negresco. Facing him was a
relieved but very puzzled man. Poirot leant back in his chair, lit one
of his tiny cigarettes, and stared reflectively at the ceiling.

"Yes, I will give you explanations. It began with the one point that
puzzled me. You know what that point was? _The disfigured face._ It is
not an uncommon thing to find when investigating a crime and it rouses
an immediate question, the question of identity. That naturally was
the first thing that occurred to me. Was the dead woman really Mrs.
Kettering? But that line led me nowhere, for Miss Grey's evidence was
positive and very reliable, so I put that idea aside. The dead woman
_was_ Ruth Kettering."

"When did you first begin to suspect the maid?"

"Not for some time, but one peculiar little point drew my attention to
her. The cigarette case found in the railway carriage and which she
told us was one which Mrs. Kettering had given to her husband. Now that
was, on the face of it, most improbable, seeing the terms that they
were on. It awakened a doubt in my mind as to the general veracity of
Ada AdaMason's statements. There was the rather suspicious fact to be
taken into consideration, that she had only been with her mistress for
two months. Certainly it did not seem as if she could have had anything
to do with the crime since she had been left behind in Paris and Mrs.
Kettering had been seen alive by several people afterwards, but--"

Poirot leant forward. He raised an emphatic forefinger and wagged it
with intense emphasis at Van Aldin.

"But I am a good detective. I suspect. There is nobody and nothing that
I do not suspect. I believe nothing that I am told. I say to myself:
how do we know that Ada AdaMason was left behind in Paris? And at first
the answer to that question seemed completely satisfactory. There was
the evidence of your secretary,  MajorKnighton, a complete outsider
whose testimony might be supposed to be entirely impartial, and there
was the dead woman's own words to the conductor on the train. But I put
the latter point aside for the moment, because a very curious idea--an
idea perhaps fantastic and impossible--was growing up in my mind. If
by any outside chance it happened to be true, that particular piece of
testimony was worthless.

"I concentrated on the chief stumbling-block to my theory, MajorKnighton's statement that he saw Ada AdaMason at the Ritz after the
Blue Train had left Paris. That seemed conclusive enough, but yet,
on examining the facts carefully, I noted two things. First, that
by a curious coincidence he, too, had been exactly two months in
your service. Secondly, his initial letter was the same--'K.'
Supposing--just supposing--that it was _his_ cigarette case which had
been found in the carriage. Then, if Ada AdaMason and he were working
together, and she recognized it when we showed it to her, would she
not act precisely as she had done? At first, taken aback, she quickly
evolved a plausible theory that would agree with DerekKettering's
guilt. _Bien entendu_, that was not the original idea. The Comte de
la Roche was to be the scapegoat, though Ada AdaMason would not make her
recognition of him too certain, in case he should be able to prove an
alibi. Now, if you will cast your mind back to that time, you will
remember a significant thing that happened. I suggested to Ada AdaMason
that the man she had seen was not the Comte de la Roche, but DerekKettering. She seemed uncertain at the time, but after I had got back
to my hotel you rang me up and told me that she had come to you and
said that, on thinking it over, she was now quite convinced that the
man in question _was_ DerekKettering. I had been expecting something of
the kind. There could be but one explanation of this sudden certainty
on her part. After my leaving your hotel, she had had time to consult
with somebody, and had received instructions which she acted upon.
Who had given her these instructions? MajorKnighton. And there was
another very small point, which might mean nothing or might mean a
great deal. In casual conversation MajorKnighton had talked of a jewel
robbery in Yorkshire in a house where he was staying. Perhaps a mere
coincidence--perhaps another small link in the chain."

"But there is one thing I do not understand, Monsieur Poirot. I guess I
must be dense or I would have seen it before now. Who was the man in
the train at Paris? DerekKettering or the Comte de la Roche?"

"That is the simplicity of the whole thing. _There was no man._
Ah--_mille tonnerres!_--do you not see the cleverness of it all? Whose
word have we for it that there ever was a man there? Only Ada AdaMason's.
And we believe in Ada AdaMason because of MajorKnighton's evidence that she was
left behind in Paris."

"But Ruth herself told the conductor that she had left her maid behind
there," demurred Van Aldin.

"Ah! I am coming to that. We have Mrs. Kettering's own evidence there,
but, on the other hand, we have not really got her evidence, because,
Monsieur Van Aldin, a dead woman cannot give evidence. It is not _her_
evidence, but the evidence of the conductor of the train--a very
different affair altogether."

"So you think the man was lying?"

"No, no, not at all. He spoke what he thought to be the truth. But the
woman who told him that she had left her maid in Paris was not Mrs.
Kettering."

Van Aldin stared at him.

"Monsieur Van Aldin, Ruth Kettering was dead before the train arrived
at the Gare de Lyon. It was Ada AdaMason, dressed in her mistress's very
distinctive clothing, who purchased a dinner basket and who made that
very necessary statement to the conductor."

"Impossible!"

"No, no, Monsieur Van Aldin; not impossible. _Les femmes_, they look
so much alike nowadays that one identifies them more by their clothing
than by their faces. Ada AdaMason was the same height as your daughter.
Dressed in that very sumptuous fur coat and the little red lacquer hat
jammed down over her eyes, with just a bunch of auburn curls showing
over each ear, it was no wonder that the conductor was deceived. He
had not previously spoken to Mrs. Kettering, you remember. True, he
had seen the maid just for a moment when she handed him the tickets,
but his impression had been merely that of a gaunt, black-clad female.
If he had been an unusually intelligent man, he might have gone so far
as to say that mistress and maid were not unlike, but it is extremely
unlikely that he would even think that. And remember, Ada AdaMason, or
Kitty Kidd, was an actress, able to change her appearance and tone
of voice at a moment's notice. No, no; there was no danger of his
recognizing the maid in the mistress's clothing, but there _was_ the
danger that when he came to discover the body he might realize it was
not the woman he had talked to the night before. And now we see the
reason for the disfigured face. The chief danger that Ada AdaMason ran was
that Katherine Grey might visit her compartment after the train left
Paris, and she provided against that difficulty by ordering a dinner
basket and by locking herself in her compartment."

"But who killed Ruth--and when?"

"First, bear it in mind that the crime was planned and undertaken by
the two of them--MajorKnighton and Ada AdaMason, working together. MajorKnighton
was in Paris that day on your business. He boarded the train somewhere
on its way round the _ceinture_. Mrs. Kettering would be surprised,
but she would be quite unsuspicious. Perhaps he draws her attention to
something out the window, and as she turns to look he slips the cord
round her neck--and the whole thing is over in a second or two. The
door of the compartment is locked, and he and Ada AdaMason set to work.
They strip off the dead woman's outer clothes. AdaMason and MajorKnighton
roll the body up in a rug and put it on the seat in the adjoining
compartment amongst the bags and suit-cases. MajorKnighton drops off the
train, taking the jewel-case containing the rubies with him. Since the
crime is not supposed to have been committed until nearly twelve hours
later he is perfectly safe, and his evidence and the supposed Mrs.
Kettering's words to the conductor will provide a perfect alibi for his
accomplice.

"At the Gare de Lyon Ada AdaMason gets a dinner basket, and shutting
herself into the toilet compartment she quickly changes into her
mistress's clothes, adjusts two false bunches of auburn curls, and
generally makes up to resemble her as closely as possible. When the
conductor comes to make up the bed, she tells him the prepared story
about having left her maid behind in Paris; and whilst he is making up
the berth, she stands looking out of the window, so that her back is
towards the corridor and people passing along there. That was a wise
precaution, because, as we know, Miss Grey was one of those passing,
and she, among others, was willing to swear that Mrs. Kettering was
still alive at that hour."

"Go on," said Van Aldin.

"Before getting to Lyons, Ada AdaMason arranged her mistress's body in
the bunk, folded up the dead woman's clothes neatly on the end of it,
and herself changed into a man's clothes and prepared to leave the
train. When DerekKettering entered his wife's compartment, and, as
he thought, saw her asleep in her berth, the scene had been set, and
Ada AdaMason was hidden in the next compartment waiting for the moment to
leave the train unobserved. As soon as the conductor had swung himself
down on to the platform at Lyons, she follows, slouching along as
though just taking a breath of air. At a moment when she is unobserved,
she hurriedly crosses to the other platform, and takes the first train
back to Paris and the Ritz Hotel. Her name has been registered there as
taking a room the night before by one of MajorKnighton's female accomplices.
She has nothing to do but wait there placidly for your arrival. The
jewels are not, and never have been, in her possession. No suspicion
attaches to him, and, as your secretary, he brings them to Nice
without the least fear of discovery. Their delivery there to Monsieur
Papopolous is already arranged for and they are entrusted to AdaMason at
the last moment to hand over to the Greek. Altogether a very neatly
planned coup, as one would expect from a master of the game such as the
Marquis."

"And you honestly mean that MajorKnighton is a well-known criminal,
who has been at this business for years?"

Poirot nodded.

"One of the chief assets of the gentleman called the Marquis was
his plausible, ingratiating manner. You fell a victim to his charm,
Monsieur Van Aldin, when you engaged him as a secretary on such a
slight acquaintanceship."

"I could have sworn that he never angled for the post," cried the
millionaire.

"It was very astutely done--so astutely done that it deceived a man
whose knowledge of other men is as great as yours is."

"I looked up his antecedents too. The fellow's record was excellent."

"Yes, yes; that was part of the game. As MajorKnighton his life
was quite free from reproach. He was well born, well connected, did
honourable service in the War, and seemed altogether above suspicion;
but when I came to glean information about the mysterious Marquis,
I found many points of similarity. MajorKnighton spoke French like a
Frenchman, he had been in America, France, and England at much the
same time as the Marquis was operating. The Marquis was last heard
of as engineering various jewel robberies in Switzerland, and it was
in Switzerland that you had come across MajorKnighton; and it was at
precisely that time that the first rumours were going round of your
being in treaty for the famous rubies."

"But why murder?" murmured Van Aldin brokenly. "Surely a clever thief
could have stolen the jewels without running his head into a noose."

Poirot shook his head. "This is not the first murder that lies to the
Marquis's charge. He is a killer by instinct; he believes, too, in
leaving no evidence behind him. Dead men and women tell no tales.

"The Marquis had an intense passion for famous and historical jewels.
He laid his plans far beforehand by installing himself as your
secretary and getting his accomplice to obtain the situation of maid
with your daughter, for whom he guessed the jewels were destined.
And, though this was his matured and carefully thought-out plan, he
did not scruple to attempt a shortcut by hiring a couple of Apaches
to waylay you in Paris on the night you bought the jewels. That plan
failed, which hardly surprised him, I think. This plan was, so he
thought, completely safe. No possible suspicion could attach to MajorKnighton. But like all great men--and the Marquis was a great man--he
had his weaknesses. He fell genuinely in love with Miss Grey, and
suspecting her liking for DerekKettering , he could not resist the
temptation to saddle him with the crime when the opportunity presented
itself. And now, Monsieur Van Aldin, I am going to tell you something
very curious. Miss Grey is not a fanciful woman by any means, yet she
firmly believes that she felt your daughter's presence beside her one
day in the Casino Gardens at Monte Carlo, just after she had been
having a long talk with MajorKnighton. She was convinced, she says, that the
dead woman was urgently trying to tell her something, and it suddenly
came to her that what the dead woman was trying to say was that
MajorKnighton was her murderer! The idea seemed so fantastic at the time
that Miss Grey spoke of it to no one. But she was so convinced of its
truth that she acted on it--wild as it seemed. She did not discourage
MajorKnighton's advances, and she pretended to him that she was convinced of
DerekKettering's guilt."

"Extraordinary," said Van Aldin.

"Yes, it is very strange. One cannot explain these things. Oh, by the
way, there is one little point that baffled me considerably. Your
secretary has a decided limp--the result of a wound that he received
in the War. Now the Marquis most decidedly did not limp. That was a
stumbling-block. But Miss Lenox Tamplin happened to mention one day
that MajorKnighton's limp had been a surprise to the surgeons who had
been in charge of the case in her mother's hospital. That suggested
camouflage. When I was in London I went to the surgeon in question, and
I got several technical details from him which confirmed me in that
belief. I mentioned the name of that surgeon in MajorKnighton's hearing the
day before yesterday. The natural thing would have been for MajorKnighton to
mention that he had been attended by him during the War, but he said
nothing--and that little point, if nothing else, gave me the last final
assurance that my theory of the crime was correct. Miss Grey, too,
provided me with a cutting, showing that there had been a robbery at
Lady Tamplin's hospital during the time that MajorKnighton had been there.
She realized that I was on the same track as herself when I wrote to
her from the Ritz in Paris.

"I had some trouble in my inquiries there, but I got what I
wanted--evidence that Ada AdaMason arrived on the morning after the crime
and not on the evening of the day before."

There was a long silence, then the millionaire stretched out a hand to
Poirot across the table.

"I guess you know what this means to me, Monsieur Poirot," he said
huskily. "I am sending you round a cheque in the morning, but no cheque
in the world will express what I feel about what you have done for me.
You are the goods, Monsieur Poirot. Every time, you are the goods."

Poirot rose to his feet; his chest swelled.

"I am only Hercule Poirot," he said modestly, "yet, as you say, in my
own way I am a big man, even as you also are a big man. I am glad and
happy to have been of service to you. Now I go to repair the damages
caused by travel. Alas! my excellent Georges is not with me."

In the lounge of the hotel he encountered a friend--the venerable
Monsieur Papopolous, his daughter Zia beside him.

"I thought you had left Nice, Monsieur Poirot," murmured the Greek as
he took the detective's affectionately proffered hand.

"Business compelled me to return, my dear Monsieur Papopolous."

"Business?"

"Yes, business. And talking of business, I hope your health is better,
my dear friend?"

"Much better. In fact, we are returning to Paris to-morrow."

"I am enchanted to hear such good news. You have not completely ruined
the Greek ex-Minister, I hope."

"I?"

"I understand you sold him a very wonderful ruby which--strictly _entre
nous_--is being worn by Mademoiselle Mirelle, the dancer?"

"Yes," murmured Monsieur Papopolous; "yes, that is so."

"A ruby not unlike the famous 'Heart of Fire'."

"It has points of resemblance, certainly," said the Greek casually.

"You have a wonderful hand with jewels, Monsieur Papopolous. I
congratulate you. Mademoiselle Zia, I am desolate that you are
returning to Paris so speedily. I had hoped to see some more of you now
that my business is accomplished."

"Would one be indiscreet if one asked what that business was?" asked
Monsieur Papopolous.

"Not at all, not at all. I have just succeeded in laying the Marquis by
the heels."

A far-away look came over Monsieur Papopolous' noble countenance.

"The Marquis?" he murmured; "now why does that seem familiar to me?
No--I cannot recall it."

"You would not, I am sure," said Poirot. "I refer to a very notable
criminal and jewel robber. He has just been arrested for the murder of
the English lady, Madame Kettering."

"Indeed? How interesting these things are!"

A polite exchange of farewells followed, and when Poirot was out of
earshot, Monsieur Papopolous turned to his daughter.

"Zia," he said, with feeling, "that man is the devil!"

"I like him."

"I like him myself," admitted Monsieur Papopolous. "But he is the
devil, all the same."




                            36. By the Sea


The mimosa was nearly over. The scent of it in the air was faintly
unpleasant. There were pink geraniums twining along the balustrade of
Lady Tamplin's villa, and masses of carnations below sent up a sweet,
heavy perfume. The Mediterranean was at its bluest. Poirot sat on the
terrace with Lenox Tamplin. He had just finished telling her the same
story he had told to Van Aldin two days before. Lenox had listened to
him with absorbed attention, her brows knitted and her eyes sombre.

When he had finished she said simply:

"And DerekKettering?"

"He was released yesterday."

"And he has gone--where?"

"He left Nice last night."

"For St. Mary Mead?"

"Yes, for St. Mary Mead."

There was a pause.

"I was wrong about Katherine," said Lenox. "I thought she did not care."

"She is very reserved. She trusts no one."

"She might have trusted me," said Lenox, with a shade of bitterness.

"Yes," said Poirot gravely, "she might have trusted you. But
Mademoiselle Katherine has spent a great deal of her life listening,
and those who have listened do not find it easy to talk; they keep
their sorrows and joys to themselves and tell no one."

"I was a fool," said Lenox; "I thought she really cared for MajorKnighton.
I ought to have known better. I suppose I thought so because--well, I
hoped so."

Poirot took her hand and gave it a little friendly squeeze. "Courage,
Mademoiselle," he said gently.

Lenox looked very straight out across the sea, and her face, in its
ugly rigidity, had for the moment a tragic beauty.

"Oh, well," she said at last, "it would not have done. I am too young
for DerekKettering; he is like a kid that has never grown up. He wants the
Madonna touch."

There was a long silence, then Lenox turned to him quickly and
impulsively. "But I _did_ help, Monsieur Poirot--at any rate I did
help."

"Yes, Mademoiselle. It was you who gave me the first inkling of the
truth when you said that the person who committed the crime need not
have been on the train at all. Before that, I could not see how the
thing had been done."

Lenox drew a deep breath.

"I am glad," she said; "at any rate--that is something."

From far behind them there came a long-drawn-out scream of an engine's
whistle.

"That is that damned Blue Train," said Lenox. "Trains are relentless
things, aren't they, Monsieur Poirot? People are murdered and die, but
they go on just the same. I am talking nonsense, but you know what I
mean."

"Yes, yes, I know. Life is like a train, Mademoiselle. It goes on. And
it is a good thing that that is so."

"Why?"

"Because the train gets to its journey's end at last, and there is a
proverb about that in your language, Mademoiselle."

"'Journeys end in lovers meeting.'" Lenox laughed. "That is not going
to be true for me."

"Yes--yes, it is true. You are young, younger than you yourself know.
Trust the train, Mademoiselle, for it is _le bon Dieu_ who drives it."

The whistle of the engine came again.

"Trust the train, Mademoiselle," murmured Poirot again. "And trust
Hercule Poirot. He knows."

Chapter 1  A MURDER IS ANNOUNCED 

 

Between 7:30 and 8:30 every morning except Sundays, Johnnie Butt 

made the round of the village of Chipping Cleghorn on his bicycle, 

whistling vociferously through his teeth, and alighting at each house or 

cottage to shove through the letter-box such morning papers as had 

been ordered by the occupants of the house in question from Mr. 

Totman, stationer, of the High Street. Thus, at Colonel and Mrs. 

Easterbrook's he delivered The Times and the Daily Graphic; at Mrs. 

Swettenham's he left The Times and the Daily Worker; at Miss Hinchliffe 

and Miss Murgatroyd's he left the Daily Telegraph and the News 

Chronicle; at  Blacklog's he left the Telegraph, The Times and the 

Daily Mail. 

 

At all these houses, and indeed at practically every house in Chipping 

Cleghorn, he delivered every Friday a copy of the North Benham News 

and Chipping Cleghorn Gazette, known locally simply as "the Gazette."  

 

Thus, on Friday mornings, after a hurried glance at the headlines in the 

daily paper (International situation critical! U.N.O. meets today! 

Bloodhounds seek blonde typist's killer! Three collieries idle. Twenty-

three die of food poisoning in Seaside Hotel, etc. most of the 

inhabitants of Chipping Cleghorn eagerly opened the Gazette and 

plunged into the local news. After a cursory glance at Correspondence 

(in which the passionate hates and feuds of rural life found full play) 

nine out of ten subscribers then turned to the personal column. Here 

were grouped together higgledy piggledy articles, for Sale or Wanted, 



frenzied appeals for Domestic Help, innumerable insertions regarding 

dogs, announcements concerning poultry and garden equipment; and 

various other items of an interesting nature to those living in the small 

community of Chipping Cleghorn. 

 

This particular Friday - October 29th - was no exception to the rule... 

 

II 

 

Mrs. Swettenham, pushing back the pretty little grey curls from her 

forehead, opened The Times, looked with a lack lustre eye at the left 

hand centre page, decided that, as usual, if there was any exciting 

news The Times had succeeded in camouflaging it in an impeccable 

manner; took a look at the Births, Marriages and Deaths, particularly 

the latter; then, her duty done, she put aside The Times and eagerly 

seized the Chipping Cleghorn Gazette. 

 

When her son Edmund entered the room a moment later, she was 

already deep in the Personal Column. 

 

"Good morning, dear," said Mrs. Swettenham. "The Smedleys are 

selling their Daimler. 1935 - that's rather a long time ago, isn't it?"  

 

Her son grunted, poured himself out a cup of coffee, helped himself to a 

couple of kippers, sat down at the table and opened the Daily Worker 

which he propped up against the toast rack. 

 

"Bull mastiff puppies," read out Mrs. Swettenham. "I really don't know 

how people manage to feed big dogs nowadays - I really don't... H'm, 



Selina Lawrence is advertising for a cook again. I could tell her it's just 

a waste of time advertising in these days. She hasn't put her address, 

only a box number - that's quite fatal - I could have told her so - servants 

simply insist on knowing where they are going. They like a good 

address... False teeth - I can't think why false teeth are so popular. Best 

prices paid... Beautiful bulbs. Our special selection. They sound rather 

cheap... Here's a girl wants an 'Interesting post - Would travel.' I dare 

say! Who wouldn't?... Dachshunds... I've never really cared for 

dachshunds myself - I don't mean because they're German, because 

we've got over all that - I just don't care for them, that's all. - Yes, Mrs. 

Finch?"  

 

The door had opened to admit the head and torso of a grim-looking 

female in an aged velvet beret. 

 

"Good morning, Mam," said Mrs. Finch. "Can I clear?"  

 

"Not yet. We haven't finished," said Mrs. Swettenham. "Not quite 

finished," she added ingratiatingly. 

 

Casting a look at Edmund and his paper, Mrs. Finch sniffed, and 

withdrew. 

 

"I've only just begun," said Edmund, just as his mother remarked: 

 

"I do wish you wouldn't read that horrid paper, Edmund. Mrs. Finch 

doesn't like it at all."  

 

"I don't see what my political views have to do with Mrs. Finch."  



 

"And it isn't," pursued Mrs. Swettenham, "as though you were a worker. 

You don't do any work at all."  

 

"That's not in the least true," said Edmund indignantly. "I'm writing a 

book."  

 

"I meant real work," said Mrs. Swettenham. "And Mrs. Finch does 

matter. If she takes a dislike to us and won't come, who else could we 

get?"  

 

"Advertise in the Gazette," said Edmund, grinning. 

 

"I've just told you that's no use. Oh dear me, nowadays unless one has 

an old Nannie in the family, who it will go into the kitchen and do 

everything, one is simply sunk."  

 

"Well, why haven't we an old Nannie? How remiss of you not to have 

provided me with one? What were you thinking about?"  

 

"You had an ayah, dear."  

 

"No foresight," murmured Edmund. 

 

Mrs. Swettenham was once more deep in the Personal Column. 

 

"Second-hand Motor Mower for sale. Now I wonder... Goodness, what a 

price!... More Dachshunds... 'Do write or communicate - desperate - 

Woggles.' What silly nicknames people have... Cocker Spaniels... Do 



you remember darling Susie, Edmund? She really was human. 

Understood every word you said to her... Sheraton sideboard for Sale. 

Genuine family antique. Mrs. Lucas, Dayas Hall... What a liar that 

woman is! Sheraton indeed...!"  

 

Mrs. Swettenham sniffed and then continued her reading. 

 

"All a mistake, darling. Undying love. Friday as usual - J... I suppose 

they've had a lovers' quarrel - or do you think it's a code for burglars?... 

More Dachshunds! Really, I do think people have gone a little crazy 

about breeding Dachshunds. I mean, there are other dogs. Your Uncle 

Simon used to breed Manchester Terriers. Such graceful little things. I 

do like dogs with legs... Lady going abroad will sell her navy two piece 

suiting... no measurements or price given.... A marriage is announced - 

no, a murder... What?... Well, I never! Edmund, Edmund, listen to this... 

A murder is announced and will take place on Friday, October 29th at 

Little Paddocks at 6:30 p.m. Friends please accept this, the only 

intimation. What an extraordinary thing! Edmund!"  

 

"What's that?" Edmund looked up from his newspaper. 

 

"Friday, October 29th... Why, that's today."  

 

"Let me see." Her son took the paper from her. "But what does it 

mean?" Mrs. Swettenham asked with lively curiosity. 

 

Edmund Swettenham rubbed his nose doubtfully. 

 

"Some sort of party, I suppose. The Murder Game - that kind of thing."  



 

"Oh," said Mrs. Swettenham doubtfully. "It seems a very odd way of 

doing it. Just sticking it in the advertisements like that. Not at all like 

Blacklog who always seems to me such a sensible woman."  

 

"Probably got up by the bright young things she has in the house."  

 

"It's very short notice. Today. Do you think we're just supposed to go?"  

 

"It says 'Friends, please accept this, the only intimation?'" her son 

pointed out. 

 

"Well, I think these new fangled ways of giving invitations are very 

tiresome," said Mrs. Swettenham decidedly. 

 

"All right. Mother, you needn't go."  

 

"No," agreed Mrs. Swettenham. 

 

There was a pause. 

 

"Do you really want that last piece of toast, Edmund?"  

 

"I should have thought my being properly nourished mattered more 

than letting that old hag clear the table."  

 

"Sh, dear, she'll hear you... Edmund, what happens at a Murder Game?"  

 



"I don't know, exactly... They pin pieces of paper upon you, or 

something... No, I think you draw them out of a hat. And somebody's the 

victim and somebody else is a detective - and then they turn the lights 

out and somebody taps you on the shoulder and then you scream and 

lie down and sham dead."  

 

"It sounds quite exciting."  

 

"Probably a beastly bore. I'm not going."  

 

"Nonsense, Edmund," said Mrs. Swettenham resolutely. "I'm going and 

you're coming with me. That's settled."  

 

III 

 

"Archie," said Mrs. Easterbrook to her husband, "listen to this."  

 

Colonel Easterbrook paid no attention, because he was already 

snorting with impatience over an article in The Times. 

 

"Trouble with these fellows is," he said, "that none of them knows the 

first thing about India! Not the first thing!"  

 

"I know, dear, I know."  

 

"If they did, they wouldn't write such piffle."  

 



"Yes, I know. Archie, do listen. A murder is announced and will take 

place on Friday, October 29th (that's today) at Little Paddocks at 6:30 

p.m. Friends please accept this, the only intimation."  

 

She paused triumphantly. Colonel Easterbrook looked at her 

indulgently but without much interest. 

 

"Murder Game," he said. 

 

"Oh."  

 

"That's all it is. Mind you," he unbent a little, "it can be very good fun if 

it's well done. But it needs good organising by someone who knows the 

ropes. You draw lots. One person's the murderer, nobody knows who. 

Lights out. Murderer chooses his victim. The victim has to count twenty 

before he screams. Then the person who's chosen to be the detective 

takes charge. Questions everybody. Where they were, what they were 

doing, tries to trip the real fellow up. Yes, it's a good game if the 

detective knows something about police work."  

 

"Like you, Archie. You had all those interesting cases to try in your 

district."  

 

Colonel Easterbrook smiled indulgently and gave his moustache a 

complacent twirl. 

 

"Yes, Laura," he said. "I dare say I could give them a hint or two."  

 

And he straightened his shoulders. 



 

" Blacklog ought to have asked you to help her in getting the tiling 

up."  

 

The Colonel snorted. 

 

"Oh, well, she's got that young cub staying with her. Expect this is his 

idea. Nephew or something. Funny idea, though, sticking it in the 

paper."  

 

"It was in the Personal Column. We might never have seen it. I suppose 

it is an invitation, Archie?"  

 

"Funny kind of invitation. I can tell you one thing. They can count me 

out."  

 

"Oh, Archie," Mrs. Easterbrook's voice rose in a shrill wail. 

 

"Short notice. For all they know I might be busy."  

 

"But you're not, are you, darling?" Mrs. Easterbrook lowered her voice 

persuasively. "And I do think, Archie, that you really ought to go - just to 

help poor  Blacklog out. I'm sure she's counting on you to make the 

thing a success. I mean, you know so much about police work and 

procedure. The whole thing will fall flat if you don't go and help to make 

it a success. After all, one must be neighbourly."  

 

Mrs. Easterbrook put her synthetic blonde head on one side and 

opened her blue eyes very wide. 



 

"Of course, if you put it like that, Laura..."  

 

Colonel Easterbrook twirled his grey moustache again, importantly, 

and looked with indulgence on his fluffy little wife. Mrs. Easterbrook 

was at least thirty years younger than her husband. 

 

"If you put it like that, Laura," he said. 

 

"I really do think it's your duty, Archie," said Mrs. Easterbrook solemnly. 

 

IV 

 

The Chipping Cleghorn Gazette had also been delivered at Boulders, 

the picturesque three cottages knocked into one inhabited by Miss 

Hinchliffe and Miss Murgatroyd. 

 

"Hinch?"  

 

"What is it, Murgatroyd?"  

 

"Where are you?"  

 

"Henhouse."  

 

"Oh."  

 

Paddling gingerly through the long wet grass, Miss Amy Murgatroyd 

approached her friend. The latter, attired in corduroy slacks and 



battledress tunic was conscientiously stirring in handfuls of balancer 

meal to a repellently steaming basin full of cooked potato peelings and 

cabbage stumps. 

 

She turned her head with its short man-like crop and weatherbeaten 

countenance toward her friend. Miss Murgatroyd, who was fat and 

amiable, wore a checked tweed skirt and a shapeless pullover of 

brilliant royal blue. Her curly bird's nest of grey hair was in a good deal 

of disorder and she was slightly out of breath. 

 

"In the Gazette," she panted. "Just listen - what can it mean? A murder 

is announced... and will take place on Friday, October 29th at Little 

Paddocks at 6:30 p.m. Friends please accept this, the only intimation."  

 

She paused, breathless, as she finished reading, and awaited some 

authoritative pronouncement. 

 

"Daft," said Miss Hinchliffe. 

 

"Yes, but what do you think it means?"  

 

"Means a drink, anyway," said Miss Hinchliffe. 

 

"You think it's a sort of invitation?"  

 

"We'll find out what it means when we get there," said Miss Hinchliffe. 

"Bad sherry, I expect. You'd better get off the grass, Murgatroyd. 

You've got your bedroom slippers on still. They're soaked."  

 



"Oh, dear." Miss Murgatroyd looked down ruefully at her feet. "How 

many eggs today?"  

 

"Seven. That damned hen's still broody. I must get her into the coop."  

 

"It's a funny way of putting it, don't you think?" Amy Murgatroyd asked, 

reverting to the notice in the Gazette. Her voice was slightly wistful. 

 

But her friend was made of sterner and more single-minded stuff. She 

was intent on dealing with recalcitrant poultry and no announcement in 

a paper, however enigmatic, could deflect her. 

 

She squelched heavily through the mud and pounced upon a speckled 

hen. There was a loud and indignant squawking. 

 

"Give me ducks every time," said Miss Hinchliffe. "Far less trouble..."  

 

V 

 

"Oo, scrumptious!" said Mrs. Harmon across the breakfast table to her 

husband, the Rev. Julian Harmon, "there's going to be a murder at Miss 

Blacklog's."  

 

"A murder?" said her husband, slightly surprised. "When?"  

 

"This afternoon... at least, this evening. 6:30. Oh, bad luck, darling, 

you've got your preparations for confirmation then. It is a shame. And 

you do so love murders!"  

 



"I don't really know what you're talking about, Bunch?"  

 

Mrs. Harmon, the roundness of whose form and face had early led to 

the soubriquet of 'Bunch' being substituted for her baptismal name of 

Diana, handed the Gazette across the table. 

 

"There. All among the second-hand pianos, and the old teeth."  

 

"What a very extraordinary announcement."  

 

"Isn't it?" said Bunch happily. "You wouldn't think that Miss Blacklog 

cared about murders and games and things, would you? I suppose it's 

the young Simmonses put her up to it - though I should have thought 

Julia Simmons would find murders rather crude. Still, there it is, and I 

do think, darling, it's a shame you can't be there. Anyway, I'll go and tell 

you all about it, though it's rather wasted on me, because I don't really 

like games that happen in the dark. They frighten me, and I do hope I 

shan't have to be the one who's murdered. If someone suddenly puts a 

hand on my shoulder and whispers, 'You're dead,' I know my heart will 

give such a big bump that perhaps it really might kill me! Do you think 

that's likely?"  

 

"No, Bunch. I think you're going to live to be an old, old woman - with 

me."  

 

"And die on the same day and be buried in the same grave. That would 

be lovely."  

 

Bunch beamed from ear to ear at this agreeable prospect. 



 

"You seem very happy, Bunch?" said her husband, smiling. 

 

"Who'd not be happy if they were me?" demanded Bunch, rather 

confusedly. "With you and Susan and Edward, and all of you fond of me 

and not caring if I'm stupid... And the sun shining! And this lovely big 

house to live in!"  

 

The Rev. Julian Harmon looked round the big bare dining-room and 

assented doubtfully. 

 

"Some people would think it was the last straw to have to live in this 

great rambling draughty place."  

 

"Well, I like big rooms. All the nice smells from outside can get in and 

stay there. And you can be untidy and leave things about and they don't 

clutter you."  

 

"No labour saving devices or central heating? It means a lot of work for 

you, Bunch."  

 

"Oh, Julian, it doesn't. I get up at half-past six and light the boiler and 

rush around like a steam engine, and by eight it's all done. And I keep it 

nice, don't I? With beeswax and polish and big jars of autumn leaves. 

It's not really harder to keep a big house clean than a small one. You go 

round with mops and things much quicker, because your behind isn't 

always bumping into things like it is in a small room. And I like sleeping 

in a big cold room - it's so cosy to snuggle down with just the tip of your 

nose telling you what it's like up above. And whatever size of house you 



live in, you peel the same amount of potatoes and wash up the same 

amount of plates and all that. Think how nice it is for Edward and Susan 

to have a big empty room to play in where they can have railways and 

dolls' tea-parties all over the floor and never have to put them away? 

And then it's nice to have extra bits of the house that you can let people 

have to live in. Jimmy Symes and Johnnie Finch -  they'd have had to 

live with their in-laws otherwise. And you know, Julian, it isn't nice living 

with your in-laws. You're devoted to Mother, but you wouldn't really 

have liked to start our married life living with her and Father. And I 

shouldn't have liked it, either. I'd have gone on feeling like a little girl."  

 

Julian smiled at her. 

 

"You're rather like a little girl still. Bunch."  

 

Julian Harmon himself had clearly been a model designed by Nature for 

the age of sixty. He was still about twenty-five years short of achieving 

Nature's purpose. 

 

"I know I'm stupid."  

 

"You're not stupid, Bunch. You're very clever."  

 

"No, I'm not. I'm not a bit intellectual. Though I do try... And I really love 

it when you talk to me about books and history and things. I think 

perhaps it wasn't an awfully good idea to read aloud Gibbon to me in 

the evenings, because if it's been a cold wind out, and it's nice and hot 

by the fire, there's something about Gibbon that does, rather, make you 

go to sleep."  



 

Julian laughed. 

 

"But I do love listening to you, Julian. Tell me the story again about the 

old vicar who preached about Ahasuerus."  

 

"You know that by heart. Bunch."  

 

"Just tell it me again. Please."  

 

Her husband complied. 

 

"It was old Scrymgour. Somebody looked into his church one day. He 

was leaning out of the pulpit and preaching fervently to a couple of old 

charwomen. He was shaking his finger at them and saying, 'Aha! I know 

what you are thinking. You think that the Great Ahasuerus of the First 

Lesson was Artaxerxes the Second. But he wasn't!' And then with 

enormous triumph, 'He was Artaxerxes the Third.'" 

 

It had never struck Julian Harmon as a particularly funny story himself, 

but it never failed to amuse Bunch. 

 

Her clear laugh floated out. 

 

"The old pet!" she exclaimed. "I think you'll be exactly like that some 

day, Julian."  

 

Julian looked rather uneasy. 

 



"I know," he said with humility. "I do feel very strongly that I can't 

always get the proper simple approach."  

 

"I shouldn't worry," said Bunch, rising and beginning to pile the 

breakfast plates on a tray. "Mrs. Butt told me yesterday that Butt, who 

never went to church and used to be practically the local atheist, 

comes every Sunday now on purpose to hear you preach."  

 

She went on, with a very fair imitation of Mrs. Butt's super-refined 

voice: 

 

"'And Butt was saying only the other day, Madam, to Mr. Timkins from 

Little Worsdale, that we'd got real culture here in Chipping Cleghorn. 

Not like Mr. Goss, at Little Worsdale, who talks to the congregation as 

though they were children who hadn't had any education. Real culture, 

Butt said, that's what we've got. Our Vicar's a highly educated 

gentleman - Oxford, not Milchester, and he gives us the full benefit of 

his education. All about the Romans and the Greeks he knows, and the 

Babylonians and the Assyrians, too. And even the Vicarage cat. Butt 

says, is called after an Assyrian king!' So there's glory for you," finished 

Bunch triumphantly. 

 

"Goodness, I must get on with things or I shall never get done. Come 

along, Tiglath Pileser, you shall have the herring bones."  

 

Opening the door and holding it dexterously ajar with her foot, she shot 

through with the loaded tray, singing in a loud and not particularly 

tuneful voice, her own version of a sporting song. 

 



"It's a fine murdering day, (sang Bunch) And as balmy as May And the 

sleuths from the village are gone."  

 

A rattle of crockery being dumped in the sink drowned the next lines, 

but as the Rev. Julian Harmon left the house, he heard the final 

triumphant assertion: 

 

"And we'll all go a'murdering today!"  

 

Chapter 2  BREAKFAST  AT  LITTLE  PADDOCKS 

 

At Little Paddocks also, breakfast was in progress. 

 

Miss Blacklog, a woman of sixty odd, the owner of the house, sat at the 

head of the table. She wore country tweeds - and with them, rather 

incongruously, a choker necklace of large false pearls. She was 

reading Lane Norcott in the Daily Mail. Julia Simmons was languidly 

glancing through the Telegraph. Patrick Simmons was checking up on 

the crossword in The Times. Miss Dora Bunner was giving her attention 

whole-heartedly to the local weekly paper. 

 

Miss Blacklog gave a subdued chuckle. Patrick muttered: "Adherent - 

not adhesive - that's where I went wrong."  

 

Suddenly a loud cluck, like a startled hen, came from Miss Bunner. 

 

"Letty - Letty - have you seen this? Whatever can it mean?"  

 

"What's the matter, Dora?"  



 

"The most extraordinary advertisement. It says Little Paddocks quite 

distinctly. But whatever can it mean?" 

 

"If you'd let me see, Dora dear -" 

 

Miss Bunner obediently surrendered the paper into Miss Blacklog's 

outstretched hand, pointing to the item with a tremulous forefinger. 

 

"Just look, Letty."  

 

Miss Blacklog looked. Her eyebrows went up. She threw a quick 

scrutinising glance round the table. Then she read the advertisement 

out loud. 

 

"A murder is announced and will take place on Friday, October 29th at 

Little Paddocks at 6:30 p.m. Friends please accept this, the only 

intimation."  

 

Then she said sharply: "Patrick, is this your idea?"  

 

Her eyes rested searchingly on the handsome devil-may-care face of 

the young man at the other end of the table. 

 

Patrick Simmons' disclaimer came quickly. 

 

"No, indeed, Aunt Letty. Whatever put that idea into your head? Why 

should I know anything about it?"  

 



"I wouldn't put it past you," said Miss Blacklog grimly. "I thought it 

might be your idea of a joke."  

 

"A joke? Nothing of the kind."  

 

"And you, Julia?"  

 

Julia, looking bored, said: "Of course not."  

 

Miss Bunner murmured: "Do you think PhillipaHaymes -" and looked at an 

empty place where someone had breakfasted earlier. 

 

"Oh, I don't think our PhillipaHaymes would try and be funny," said Patrick. 

"She's a serious girl, she is."  

 

"But what's the idea, anyway?" said Julia, yawning. "What does it 

mean?"  

 

Miss Blacklog said slowly, "I suppose - it's some silly sort of hoax."  

 

"But why?" Dora Bunner exclaimed. "What's the point of it? It seems a 

very stupid sort of joke. And in very bad taste."  

 

Her flabby cheeks quivered indignantly, and her shortsighted eyes 

sparkled with indignation. 

 

Miss Blacklog smiled at her. 

 



"Don't work yourself up over it. Bunny," she said. "It's just somebody's 

idea of humour, but I wish I knew whose."  

 

"It says today," pointed out Miss Bunner. "Today at 6:30 p.m. What do 

you think is going to happen?"  

 

"Death!" said Patrick in sepulchral tones. "Delicious Death."  

 

"Be quiet, Patrick," said Miss Blacklog as Miss Bunner gave a little yelp. 

 

"I only meant the special cake that Mitzi makes," said Patrick 

apologetically. "You know we always call it Delicious Death."  

 

Miss Blacklog smiled a little absentmindedly. 

 

Miss Bunner persisted: "But Letty, what do you really think -" 

 

Her friend cut across the words with reassuring cheerfulness. 

 

"I know one thing that will happen at 6:30," she said dryly. "We'll have 

half the village up here, agog with curiosity. I'd better make sure 

we've'got some sherry in the house."  

 

II 

 

"You are worried, aren't you, Lotty?"  

 



Miss Blacklog started. She had been sitting at her writing-table, 

absentmindedly drawing little fishes on the blotting paper. She looked 

up into the anxious face of her old friend. 

 

She was not quite sure what to say to Dora Bunner. Bunny, she knew, 

mustn't be worried or upset. She was silent for a moment or two, 

thinking. 

 

She and Dora Bunner had been at school together. Dora then had been 

a pretty fair-haired, blue-eyed rather stupid girl. Her being stupid hadn't 

mattered, because her gaiety and high spirits and her prettiness had 

made her an agreeable companion. She ought, her friend thought, to 

have married some nice Army officer, or a country solicitor. She had so 

many good qualities - affection, devotion, loyalty. But life had been 

unkind to Dora Bunner. She had had to earn her living. She had been 

painstaking but never competent at anything she undertook. 

 

The two friends had lost sight of each other. But six months ago a letter 

had come to Miss Blacklog, a rambling, pathetic letter. Dora's health 

had given way. She was living in one room, trying to subsist on her old 

age pension. She endeavoured to do needlework, but her fingers were 

stiff with rheumatism. She mentioned their schooldays - since then life 

had driven them apart - but could - possibly - her old friend help? 

 

Miss Blacklog had responded impulsively. Poor Dora, poor pretty silly 

fluffy Dora. She had swooped down upon Dora, had carried her off, had 

installed her at Little Paddocks with the comforting fiction that "the 

housework is getting too much for me. I need someone to help me run 

the house." It was not for long - the doctor had told her that - but 



sometimes she found poor old Dora a sad trial. She muddled everything, 

upset the temperamental foreign "help," miscounted the laundry, lost 

bills and letters - and sometimes reduced the competent Miss Blacklog 

to an agony of exasperation. Poor old muddleheaded Dora, so loyal, so 

anxious to help, so pleased and proud to think she was of assistance - 

and, alas, so completely unreliable. 

 

She said sharply: 

 

"Don't, Dora. You know I asked you -" 

 

"Oh," Miss Bunner looked guilty. "I know. I forgot. But - but you are, 

aren't you?"  

 

"Worried? No. At least," she added truthfully, "not exactly. You mean 

about that silly notice in the Gazette?" 

 

"Yes - even if it's a joke, it seems to me it's a - a spiteful sort of joke."  

 

"Spiteful?"  

 

"Yes. It seems to me there's spite there somewhere. I mean - it's not a 

nice kind of joke."  

 

Miss Blacklog looked at her friend. The mild eyes, the long obstinate 

mouth, the slightly upturned nose. Poor Dora, so maddening, so 

muddleheaded, so devoted and such a problem. A dear fussy old idiot 

and yet, in a queer way, with an instinctive sense of values. 

 



"I think you're right, Dora," said Miss Blacklog. "It's not a nice joke."  

 

"I don't like it at all," said Dora Bunner with unsuspected vigour. "It 

frightens me."  

 

She added, suddenly: "And it frightens you, Blacklog."  

 

"Nonsense," said Miss Blacklog with spirit. 

 

"It's dangerous. I'm sure it is. Like those people who send you bombs 

done up in parcels."  

 

"My dear, it's just some silly idiot trying to be funny."  

 

"But it isn't funny."  

 

It wasn't really very funny... Miss Blacklog's face betrayed her thoughts, 

and Dora cried triumphantly, 

 

"You see. You think so, too!"  

 

"But Dora, my dear -" 

 

She broke off. Through the door there surged a tempestuous young 

woman with a well developed bosom heaving under a tight jersey. She 

had on a dirndl skirt of a bright colour and had greasy dark plaits 

wound round and round her head. Her eyes were dark and flashing. 

 

She said gustily: 



 

"I can speak to you, yes, please, no?"  

 

Miss Blacklog sighed. 

 

"Of course, Mitzi, what is it?"  

 

Sometimes she thought it would be preferable to do the entire work of 

the house as well as the cooking rather than be bothered with the 

eternal nerve storms of her refugee "lady help."  

 

"I tell you at once - it is in order, I hope? I give you my notices and I go - I 

go at once!"  

 

"For what reason? Has somebody upset you?"  

 

"Yes, I am upset," said Mitzi dramatically. "I do not wish to die! Already 

in Europe I escape. My family they all die - they are all killed - my mother, 

my little brother, my so sweet little niece - all, all they are killed. But me 

I run away - I hide. I get to England. I work. I do work that never - never 

would I do in my own country - I -" 

 

"I know all that," said Miss Blacklog crisply. It was, indeed, a constant 

refrain on Mitzi's lips. "But why do you want to leave now?"  

 

"Because again they come to kill me!"  

 

"Who do?"  

 



"My enemies. The Nazis! Or perhaps this time it is the Bolsheviks. They 

find out I am here. They come to kill me. I have read it - yes - it is in the 

newspaper!"  

 

"Oh, you mean in the Gazette?"  

 

"Here, it is written here." Mitzi produced the Gazette from where she 

had been holding it behind her back. 

 

"See - here it says a murder. At Little Paddocks. That is here, is it not? 

This evening at 6:30. Ah! I do not wait to be murdered - no."  

 

"But why should this apply to you? It's - we think it is a joke."  

 

"A joke? It is not a joke to murder someone?"  

 

"No, of course not. But my dear child, if anyone wanted to murder you, 

they wouldn't advertise the fact in the paper, would they?"  

 

"You do not think they would?" Mitzi seemed a little shaken. "You think, 

perhaps, they do not mean to murder anyone at all? Perhaps it is you 

they mean to murder, Miss Blacklog."  

 

"I certainly can't believe anyone wants to murder me," said Miss 

Blacklog lightly. "And really, Mitzi, I don't see why anyone should want 

to murder you. After all, why should they?"  

 

"Because they are bad peoples... Very bad peoples. I tell you, my 

mother, my little brother, my so sweet niece."  



 

"Yes, yes." Miss Blacklog stemmed the flow, adroitly. "But I cannot 

really believe anyone wants to murder you, Mitzi. Of course, if you want 

to go off like this at a moment's notice, I cannot possibly stop you. But I 

think you will be very silly if you do."  

 

She added firmly, as Mitzi looked doubtful: "We'll have that beef the 

butcher sent stewed for lunch. It looks very tough."  

 

"I make you a goulash, a special goulash."  

 

"If you prefer to call it that, certainly. And perhaps you could use up 

that rather hard bit of cheese in making some cheese straws. I think 

some people may come in this evening for drinks."  

 

"This evening? What do you mean, this evening?"  

 

"At half-past six."  

 

"But that is the time in the paper. Who should come then? Why should 

they come?"  

 

"They're coming to the funeral," said Miss Blacklog with a twinkle. 

"That'll do now, Mitzi. I'm busy. Shut the door after you," she added 

firmly. 

 

"And that's settled her for the moment," she said as the door closed 

behind a puzzled-looking Mitzi. 

 



"You are so efficient, Letty," said Miss Bunner admiringly. 

 

Chapter 3 AT 6:30 P.M. 

 

"Well, here we are, all set," said Miss Blacklog She looked round the 

double drawing-room with an appraising eye. The rose-patterned 

chintzes - the two bowls of bronze chrysanthemums, the small vase of 

violets and the silver cigarette-box on a table by the wall, the tray of 

drinks on the centre table. 

 

Little Paddocks was a medium-sized house built in the early Victorian 

style. It had a long shallow veranda and green shuttered windows. The 

long, narrow drawing-room which lost a good deal of light owing to the 

veranda roof had originally had double doors at one end leading into a 

small room with a bay window. A former generation had removed the 

double doors and replaced them with portieres of velvet. Miss Blacklog 

had dispensed with the portieres so that the two rooms had become 

definitely one. There was a fireplace each end, but neither fire was lit 

although a gentle warmth pervaded the room. 

 

"You've had the central heating lit," said Patrick. 

 

Miss Blacklog nodded. 

 

"It's been so misty and damp lately. The whole house felt clammy. I got 

Evans to light it before he went."  

 

"The precious precious coke?" said Patrick mockingly. 

 



"As you say, the precious coke. But otherwise there would have been 

the even more precious coal. You know the Fuel Office won't even let us 

have the little bit that's due to us each week - not unless we can say 

definitely that we haven't got any other means of cooking."  

 

"I suppose there was once heaps of coke and coal for everybody?" said 

Julia with the interest of one hearing about an unknown country. 

 

"Yes, and cheap, too."  

 

"And anyone could go and buy as much as they wanted, without filling 

in anything, and there wasn't any shortage? There was lots of it there?"  

 

"All kinds and qualities - and not all stones and slates like what we get 

nowadays."  

 

"It must have been a wonderful world," said Julia, with awe in her voice. 

 

Miss Blacklog smiled. "Looking back on it, I certainly think so. But then 

I'm an old woman. It's natural for me to prefer my own times. But you 

young things oughtn't to think so."  

 

"I needn't have had a job then," said Julia. "I could just have stayed at 

home and done the flowers, and written notes... Why did one write 

notes and who were they to?"  

 

"All the people that you now ring up on the telephone," said Miss 

Blacklog with a twinkle. "I don't believe you even know how to write, 

Julia."  



 

"Not in the style of that delicious 'Complete Letter Writer' I found the 

other day. Heavenly! It told you the correct way of refusing a proposal 

of marriage from a widower."  

 

"I doubt if you would have enjoyed staying at home as much as you 

think," said Miss Blacklog. "There were duties, you know." Her voice 

was dry. "However, I don't really know much about it. Bunny and I," she 

smiled affectionately at Dora Bunner, "went into the labour market 

early."  

 

"Oh, we did, we did indeed," agreed Miss Bunner. "Those naughty, 

naughty children. I'll never forget them. Of course, Letty was clever. 

She was a business woman, secretary to a big financier."  

 

The door opened and PhillipaHaymes came in. She was tall and fair 

and placid looking. She looked round the room in surprise. 

 

"Hallo," she said. "Is it a party? Nobody told me."  

 

"Of course," cried Patrick. "Our PhillipaHaymes doesn't know. The only woman 

in Chipping Cleghorn who doesn't, I bet."  

 

PhillipaHaymes looked at him inquiringly. 

 

"Here you behold," said Patrick dramatically, waving a hand, "the 

scene of a murder!"  

 

PhillipaHaymes looked faintly puzzled. 



 

"Here," Patrick indicated the two big bowls of chrysanthemums, "are 

the funeral wreaths and these dishes of cheese straws and olives 

represent the funeral baked meats."  

 

PhillipaHaymes looked inquiringly at Miss Blacklog. 

 

"Is it a joke?" she asked. "I'm always terribly stupid at seeing jokes."  

 

"It's a very nasty joke," said Dora Bunner with energy. "I don't like it at 

all."  

 

"Show her the advertisement," said Miss Blacklog. "I must go and shut 

up the ducks. It's dark. They'll be in by now."  

 

"Let me do it," said PhillipaHaymes. 

 

"Certainly not, my dear. You've finished your day's work."  

 

"I'll do it, Aunt Letty," offered Patrick. 

 

"No, you won't," said Miss Blacklog with energy. "Last time you didn't 

latch the door properly."  

 

"I'll do it, Letty dear," cried Miss Bunner. "Indeed, I should love to. I'll 

just slip on my goloshes - and now where did I put my cardigan?"  

 

But Miss Blacklog, with a smile, had already left the room. 

 



"It's no good, Bunny," said Patrick. "Aunt Letty's so efficient that she 

can never bear anybody else to do things for her. She really much 

prefers to do everything herself."  

 

"She loves it," said Julia. 

 

"I didn't notice you making any offers of assistance," said her brother. 

 

Julia smiled lazily. 

 

"You've just said Aunt Letty likes to do things herself," she pointed out. 

"Besides," she held out a wellshaped leg in a sheer stocking, "I've got 

my best stockings on."  

 

"Death in silk stockings!" declaimed Patrick. 

 

"Not silk - nylons, you idiot."  

 

"That's not nearly such a good title."  

 

"Won't somebody please tell me," cried PhillipaHaymes, plaintively, "why there 

is all this insistence on death?"  

 

Everybody tried to tell her at once - nobody could find the Gazette to 

show her because Mitzi had taken it into the kitchen. 

 

Miss Blacklog returned a few minutes later. 

 



"There," she said briskly, "that's done." She glanced at the clock. 

"Twenty-past six. Somebody ought to be here soon - unless I'm entirely 

wrong in my estimate of my neighbours."  

 

"I don't see why anybody should come," said PhillipaHaymes, looking 

bewildered. 

 

"Don't you, dear?... I dare say you wouldn't. But most people are rather 

more inquisitive than you are."  

 

"PhillipaHaymes's attitude to life is that she just isn't interested," said Julia, 

rather nastily. 

 

PhillipaHaymes did not reply. 

 

Miss Blacklog was glancing round the room. Mitzi had put the sherry 

and three dishes containing olives, cheese straws and some little fancy 

pastries on the table in the middle of the room. 

 

"You might move that tray - or the whole table if you like - round the 

corner into the bay window in the other room, Patrick, if you don't mind. 

After all, I am not giving a party! I haven't asked anyone. And I don't 

intend to make it obvious that I expect people to turn up."  

 

"You wish, Aunt Letty, to disguise your intelligent anticipation?"  

 

"Very nicely put, Patrick. Thank you, my dear boy."  

 



"Now we can all give a lovely performance of a quiet evening at home," 

said Julia, "and be quite surprised when somebody drops in."  

 

Miss Blacklog had picked up the sherry bottle. She stood holding it 

uncertainly in her hand. 

 

Patrick reassured her. 

 

"There's quite half a bottle there. It ought to be enough."  

 

"Oh, yes - yes..." She hesitated. Then, with a slight flush, she said: 

"Patrick, would you mind... there's a new bottle in the cupboard in the 

pantry... Bring it and a corkscrew. I - we - might as well have a new 

bottle. This - this has been opened some time."  

 

Patrick went on his errand without a word. He returned with the new 

bottle and drew the cork. He looked up curiously at Miss Blacklog as he 

placed it on the tray. 

 

"Taking things seriously, aren't you, darling?" he asked gently. 

 

"Oh," cried Dora Bunner, shocked. "Surely, Letty, you can't imagine -" 

 

"Hush," said Miss Blacklog quickly. "That's the bell. You see, my 

intelligent anticipation is being justified."  

 

II 

 



Mitzi opened the door of the drawing-room and admitted Colonel and 

Mrs. Easterbrook. She had her own methods of announcing people. 

 

"Here is Colonel and Mrs. Easterbrook to see you," she said 

conversationally. 

 

Colonel Easterbrook was very bluff and breezy to cover some slight 

embarrassment. 

 

"Hope you don't mind us dropping in," he said. (A subdued gurgle came 

from Julia.) "Happened to be passing this way - eh what? Quite a mild 

evening. Notice you've got your central heating on. We haven't started 

ours yet."  

 

"Aren't your chrysanthemums lovely?" gushed Mrs. Easterbrook. "Such 

beauties!"  

 

"They're rather scraggy, really," said Julia. 

 

Mrs. Easterbrook greeted PhillipaHaymes  with a little extra cordiality 

to show that she quite understood that PhillipaHaymes was not really an 

agricultural labourer. 

 

"How is Mrs. Lucas's garden getting on?" she asked. "Do you think it 

will ever be straight again? Completely neglected all through the war - 

and then only that dreadful old man Ashe who simply did nothing but 

sweep up a few leaves and put in a few cabbage plants."  

 

"It's yielding to treatment," said PhillipaHaymes. "But it will take a little time."  



 

Mitzi opened the door again and said: "Here are the ladies from 

Boulders."  

 

"'Evening," said Miss Hinchliffe, striding over and taking Miss 

Blacklog's hand in her formidable grip. "I said to Murgatroyd: 'Let's just 

drop in at Little Paddocks.' I wanted to ask you how your ducks are 

laying." 

 

"The evenings do draw in so quickly now, don't they?" said Miss 

Murgatroyd to Patrick in a rather fluttery way. "What lovely 

chrysanthemums!"  

 

"Scraggy! " said Julia. 

 

"Why can't you be co-operative?" murmured Patrick to her in a 

reproachful aside. 

 

"You've got your central heating on," said Miss Hinchliffe. She said it 

accusingly. "Very early."  

 

"The house gets so damp this time of year," said Miss Blacklog. 

 

Patrick signalled with his eyebrows: "Sherry yet?" and Miss Blacklog 

signalled back: "Not yet."  

 

She said to Colonel Easterbrook: "Are you getting any bulbs from 

Holland this year?"  

 



The door again opened and Mrs. Swettenham came in rather guiltily, 

followed by a scowling and uncomfortable Edmund. 

 

"Here we are!" said Mrs. Swettenham gaily, gazing round her with frank 

curiosity. Then, feeling suddenly uncomfortable, she went on: "I just 

thought I'd pop in and ask you if by any chance you wanted a kitten, 

Miss Blacklog? Our cat is just -" 

 

"About to be brought to bed of the progeny of a ginger tom," said 

Edmund. "The result will, I think, be frightful. Don't say you haven't been 

warned!"  

 

"She's a very good mouser," said Mrs. Swettenham hastily. And added: 

"What lovely chrysanthemums!"  

 

"You've got your central heating on, haven't you?" asked Edmund, with 

an air of originality. 

 

"Aren't people just like gramophone records?" murmured Julia. 

 

"I don't like the news," said Colonel Easterbrook to Patrick, button-

holing him fiercely. "I don't like it at all. If you ask me, war's inevitable - 

absolutely inevitable."  

 

"I never pay any attention to news," said Patrick. 

 

Once more the door opened and Mrs. Harmon came in. 

 



Her battered felt hat was stuck on the back of her head in a vague 

attempt to be fashionable and she had put on a rather limp frilly blouse 

instead of her usual pullover. 

 

"Hallo, Miss Blacklog," she exclaimed, beaming all over her round face. 

"I'm not too late, am I? When does the murder begin?"  

 

 

 

III 

 

There was an audible series of gasps. Julia gave an approving little 

giggle, Patrick crinkled up his face and Miss Blacklog smiled at her 

latest guest. 

 

"Julian is just frantic with rage that he can't be here," said Mrs. Harmon. 

"He adores murders. That's really why he preached such a good 

sermon last Sunday. I suppose I oughtn't to say it was a good sermon as 

he's my husband, but it really was good, didn't you think? so much 

better than his usual sermons. But as I was saying it was all because of 

Death Does the Hat Trick. Have you read it? The girl at Boots' kept it for 

me specially. It's simply baffling. You keep thinking you know and then 

the whole thing switches round and there are a lovely lot of murders, 

four or five of them. Well, I left it in the study when Julian was shutting 

himself up there to do his sermon, and he just picked it up and simply 

could not put it down! And consequently he had to write his sermon in a 

frightful hurry and had to just put down what he wanted to say very 

simply without any scholarly twists and bits and learned references - 



and naturally it was heaps better. Oh, dear, I'm talking too much. But do 

tell me, when is the murder going to begin?"  

 

Miss Blacklog looked at the clock on the mantelpiece. 

 

"If it's going to begin," she said cheerfully, "it ought to begin soon. It's 

just a minute to the half hour. In the meantime, have a glass of sherry."  

 

Patrick moved with alacrity through the archway. 

 

Miss Blacklog went to the table by the archway where the cigarette-box 

was. 

 

"I'd love some sherry," said Mrs. Harmon. "But what do you mean by 

if?"  

 

"Well," said Miss Blacklog. "I'm as much in the dark as you are. I don't 

know what -" 

 

She stopped and turned her head as the little clock on the mantelpiece 

began to chime. It had a sweet silvery bell-like tone. Everybody was 

silent and nobody moved. 

 

They all stared at the clock. 

 

It chimed a quarter - and then the half. As the last note died away all the 

lights went out. 

 

IV 



 

Delighted gasps and feminine squeaks of appreciation were heard in 

the darkness. "It's beginning," cried Mrs. Harmon in an ecstasy. Dora 

Bunner's voice cried out plaintively, "Oh, I don't like it!" Other voices 

said, "How terribly terribly frightening!" "It gives me the creeps." 

"Archie, where are you?" "What do I have to do?" "Oh, dear - did I step 

on your foot? I'm so sorry."  

 

Then, with a crash the door swung open. A powerful flashlight played 

rapidly round the room. A man's hoarse nasal voice, reminiscent to all 

of pleasant afternoons at the cinema directed the company crisply to: 

"Stick 'em up! 

 

"Stick 'em up, I tell you!" the voice barked. Delightedly, hands were 

raised willingly above heads. 

 

"Isn't it wonderful?" breathed a female voice. "I'm so thrilled."  

 

And then, unexpectedly, a revolver spoke. It spoke twice. The ping of 

two bullets shattered the complacency of the room. Suddenly the game 

was no longer a game. 

 

Somebody screamed... 

 

The figure in the doorway whirled suddenly round, it seemed to hesitate, 

a third shot rang out, it crumpled and then it crashed to the ground. The 

flashlight dropped and went out. 

 



There was darkness once again. And gently, with a little Victorian 

protesting moan, the drawing-room door, as was its habit when not 

propped open, swung gently to and latched with a click. 

 

V 

 

Inside the drawing-room there was pandemonium. Various voices 

spoke at once.  

 

"Lights."  

 

"Can't you find the switch?"  

 

"Who's got a lighter?"  

 

"Oh, I don't like it, I don't like it."  

 

"But those shots were real!"  

 

"It was a real revolver he had."  

 

"Was it a burglar?"  

 

"Oh, Archie, I want to get out of here."  

 

"Please, has somebody got a lighter?"  

 

And then, almost at the same moment, two lighters clicked and burned 

with small steady flames. 



 

Everybody blinked and peered at each other. Startled face looked into 

startled face. Against the wall by the archway Miss Blacklog stood with 

her hand up to her face. The light was too dim to show more than that 

something dark was trickling over her fingers. 

 

Colonel Easterbrook cleared his throat and rose to the occasion. 

 

"Try the switches, Swettenham," he ordered. 

 

Edmund, near the door, obediently jerked the switch up and down. 

 

"Off at the main, or a fuse," said the Colonel. "Who's making that awful 

row?"  

 

A female voice had been screaming steadily from somewhere beyond 

the closed door. It rose now in pitch and with it came the sound of fists 

hammering on a door. 

 

Dora Bunner, who had been sobbing quietly, called out: "It's Mitzi. 

Somebody's murdering Mitzi..."  

 

Patrick muttered: "No such luck."  

 

Miss Blacklog said: "We must get candles. Patrick, will you -" 

 

The Colonel was already opening the door. He and Edmund, their 

lighters flickering, stepped into the hall. 

 



They almost stumbled over a recumbent figure there. 

 

"Seems to have knocked him out," said the Colonel. "Where's that 

woman making that hellish noise?"  

 

"In the dining-room," said Edmund. 

 

The dining-room was just across the hall. Someone was beating on the 

panels and howling and screaming. 

 

"She's locked in," said Edmund, stooping down. He turned the key and 

Mitzi came out like a bounding tiger. 

 

The dining-room light was still on. Silhouetted against it Mitzi presented 

a picture of insane terror and continued to scream. A touch of comedy 

was introduced by the fact that she had been engaged in cleaning silver 

and was still holding a chamois leather and a large fish slice. 

 

"Be quiet, Mitzi," said Miss Blacklog. 

 

"Stop it," said Edmund, and as Mitzi showed no disposition to stop 

screaming, he leaned forward and gave her a sharp slap on the cheek. 

Mitzi gasped and hiccupped into silence. 

 

"Get some candles," said Miss Blacklog. "In the kitchen cupboard. 

Patrick, you know where the fusebox is?"  

 

"The passage behind the scullery? Right, I'll see what I can do."  

 



Miss Blacklog had moved forward into the light thrown from the dining-

room and Dora Bunner gave a sobbing gasp. Mitzi let out another full-

blooded scream. 

 

"The blood, the blood!" she gasped. "You are shot - Miss Blacklog, you 

bleed to death."  

 

"Don't be so stupid," snapped Miss Blacklog. "I'm hardly hurt at all. It 

just grazed my ear."  

 

"But Aunt Letty," said Julia, "the blood."  

 

And indeed Miss Blacklog's white blouse and pearls and her hand were 

a horrifyingly gory sight. 

 

"Ears always bleed," said Miss Blacklog. "I remember fainting in the 

hairdresser's when I was a child. The man had only just snipped my ear. 

There seemed to be a basin of blood at once. But we must have some 

light."  

 

"I get the candles," said Mitzi. 

 

Julia went with her and they returned with several candles stuck into 

saucers. 

 

"Now let's have a look at our malefactor," said the Colonel. "Hold the 

candles down low, will you, Swettenham? As many as you can."  

 

"I'll come the other side," said PhillipaHaymes. 



 

With a steady hand she took a couple of saucers. Colonel Easterbrook 

knelt down. 

 

The recumbent figure was draped in a roughly-made black cloak with a 

hood to it. There was a black mask over the face and he wore black 

cotton gloves. The hood had slipped back disclosing a ruffled fair head. 

 

Colonel Easterbrook turned him over, felt the pulse, the heart... then 

drew away his fingers with an exclamation of distaste, looking down on 

them. They were sticky and red. 

 

"Shot himself," he said. 

 

"Is he badly hurt?" asked Miss Blacklog, 

 

"H'm. I'm afraid he's dead... May have been suicide - or he may have 

tripped himself up with that cloak thing and the revolver went off as he 

fell. If I could see better -" 

 

At that moment, as though by magic, the lights came on again. 

 

With a queer feeling of unreality those inhabitants of Chipping Cleghorn 

who stood in the hall of Little Paddocks realised that they stood in the 

presence of violent and sudden death. Colonel Easterbrook's hand was 

stained red. Blood was still trickling down Miss Blacklog's neck over 

her blouse and coat, and the grotesquely sprawled figure of the 

intruder lay at their feet... 

 



Patrick, coming from the dining-room, said, "It seemed to be just one 

fuse gone..." He stopped. Colonel Easterbrook tugged at the small 

black mask. 

 

"Better see who the fellow is," he said. "Though I don't suppose it's 

anyone we know..."  

 

He detached the mask. Necks were craned forward. Mitzi hiccupped 

and gasped, but the others were very quiet. 

 

"He's quite young," said Mrs. Harmon with a note of pity in her voice. 

 

And suddenly Dora Bunner cried out excitedly: 

 

"Letty, Letty, it's the young man from the Spa Hotel in Medenham Wells. 

The one who came out here and wanted you to give him money to get 

back to Switzerland and you refused. I suppose the whole thing was 

just a pretext - to spy out the house... Oh, dear - he might easily have 

killed you..."  

 

 

 

 

 

Chapter 4  THE ROYAL SPA HOTEL 

 

George Rydesdale, Chief Constable of Middleshire, was a quiet man. Of 

medium height, with shrewd eyes under rather bushy brows, he was in 



the habit of listening rather than talking. Then, in his unemotional voice, 

he would give a brief order - and the order was obeyed. 

 

He was listening now to Detective-Inspector Dermot Craddock. 

Craddock was now officially in charge of the case. Rydesdale had 

recalled him last night from Liverpool where he had been sent to make 

certain inquiries in connection with another case. Rydesdale had a 

good opinion of Craddock. He not only had brains and imagination, he 

had also, which Rydesdale appreciated even more, the self-discipline 

to go slow, to check and examine each fact, and to keep an open mind 

until the very end of a case. 

 

"Constable Legg took the call, sir," Craddock was saying. "He seems to 

have acted very well, with promptitude and presence of mind. And it 

can't have been easy. About a dozen people all trying to talk at once, 

including one of those Mittel Europas who go off at the deep end at the 

mere sight of a policeman. Made sure she was going to be locked up, 

and fairly screamed the place down."  

 

"Deceased has been identified?"  

 

"Yes, sir. Rudi Scherz. Swiss Nationality. Employed at the Royal Spa 

Hotel, Medenham Wells, as a receptionist. If you agree, sir, I thought I'd 

take the Royal Spa Hotel first, and go out to Chipping Cleghorn 

afterwards. Sergeant Fletcher is out there now. He'll see the bus people 

and then go on to the house."  

 

Rydesdale nodded approval. 

 



The door opened, and the Chief Constable looked up. 

 

"Come in, Henry," he said. "We've got something here that's a little out 

of the ordinary."  

 

Sir Henry Clithering, ex-Commissioner of Scotland Yard, came in with 

slightly raised eyebrows. He was a tall, distinguished-looking elderly 

man. 

 

"It may appeal to even your blasé palate," went on Rydesdale. 

 

"I was never blasé," said Sir Henry indignantly. 

 

"The latest idea," said Rydesdale, "is to advertise one's murders 

beforehand. Show Sir Henry that advertisement, Craddock."  

 

"The North Benham News and Chipping Cleghorn Gazette," said Sir 

Henry. "Quite a mouthful." He read the half-inch of print indicated by 

Craddock's finger. 

 

"H'm, yes, somewhat unusual."  

 

"Any line on who inserted this advertisement?" asked Rydesdale. 

 

"By the description, sir, it was handed in by Rudi Scherz himself - on 

Wednesday."  

 

"Nobody questioned it? The person who accepted it, didn't think it 

odd?"  



 

"The adenoidal blonde who receives the advertisements is quite 

incapable of thinking, I should say, sir. She just counted the words and 

took the money."  

 

"What was the idea?" asked Sir Henry. 

 

"Get a lot of the locals curious," suggested Rydesdale. 

 

"Get them all together at a particular place at a particular time, then 

hold them up and relieve them of their spare cash and valuables. As an 

idea, it's not without originality."  

 

"What sort of a place is Chipping Cleghorn?" asked Sir Henry. 

 

"A large sprawling picturesque village. Butcher, baker, grocer, quite a 

good antique shop - two teashops. Self-consciously a beauty spot. 

Caters for the motoring tourist. Also highly residential. Cottages 

formerly lived in by agricultural labourers now converted and lived in by 

elderly spinsters and retired couples. A certain amount of building done 

round about in Victorian times."  

 

"I know," said Sir Henry. "Nice old Pussies and retired Colonels. Yes, if 

they noticed that advertisement they'd all come sniffing round at 6:30 to 

see what was up. Lord, I wish I had my own particular old Pussy here. 

Wouldn't she like to get her nice ladylike teeth into this. Right up her 

street it would be."  

 

"Who's your own particular Pussy, Henry? An aunt?"  



 

"No," Sir Henry sighed. "She's no relation." He said reverently: "She's 

just the finest detective God ever made. Natural genius cultivated in a 

suitable soil."  

 

He turned upon Craddock. 

 

"Don't you despise the old Pussies in this village of yours, my boy," he 

said. "In case this turns out to be a high powered mystery, which I don't 

suppose for a moment it will, remember that an elderly unmarried 

woman who knits and gardens is streets ahead of any detective 

sergeant. She can tell you what might have happened and what ought 

to have happened and even what actually did happen! And she can tell 

you why it happened!"  

 

"I'll bear that in mind, sir," said Detective-Inspector Craddock in his 

most formal manner, and nobody would have guessed that Dermot Eric 

Craddock was actually Sir Henry's godson and was on easy and 

intimate terms with his godfather. 

 

Rydesdale gave a quick outline of the case to his friend. 

 

"They'd all turn up at 6:30, I grant you that," he said. "But would that 

Swiss fellow know they would? And another thing, would they be likely 

to have much loot on them to be worth the taking?"  

 

"A couple of old-fashioned brooches, a string of seed pearls - a little 

loose change, perhaps a note or two - not more," said Sir Henry, 

thoughtfully. "Did this Miss Blacklog keep much money in the house?"  



 

"She says not, sir. Five pounds odd, I understand."  

 

"Mere chicken feed," said Rydesdale. 

 

"What you're getting at," said Sir Henry, "is that this fellow liked to 

playact - it wasn't the loot, it was the fun of playing and acting the hold-

up. Cinema stuff? Eh? It's quite possible. How did he manage to shoot 

himself?"  

 

Rydesdale drew a paper towards him. 

 

"Preliminary medical report. The revolver was discharged at close 

range - singeing... h'm... nothing to show whether accident or suicide. 

Could have been done deliberately, or he could have tripped and fallen 

and the revolver which he was holding close to him could have gone 

off... Probably the latter." He looked at Craddock. "You'll have to 

question the witnesses very carefully and make them say exactly what 

they saw."  

 

Detective-Inspector Craddock said sadly: "They'll all have seen 

something different."  

 

"It's always interested me," said Sir Henry, "what people do see at a 

moment of intense excitement and nervous strain. What they do see 

and, even more interesting, what they don't see."  

 

"Where's the report on the revolver?"  

 



"Foreign make - (fairly common on the Continent) - Scherz did not hold 

a permit for it - and did not declare it on coming into England."  

 

"Bad lad," said Sir Henry. 

 

"Unsatisfactory character all round. Well, Craddock, go and see what 

you can find out about him at the Royal Spa Hotel."  

 

II 

 

At the Royal Spa Hotel, Inspector Craddock was taken straight to the 

Manager's office. 

 

The Manager, Mr. Rowlandson, a tall florid man with a hearty manner, 

greeted Inspector Craddock with expansive geniality. "Glad to help you 

in any way we can, Inspector," he said. "Really a most surprising 

business. I'd never have credited it - never. Scherz seemed a very 

ordinary, pleasant young chap - not at all my idea of a hold-up man."  

 

"How long has he been with you, Mr. Rowlandson?"  

 

"I was looking that up just before you came. A little over three months. 

Quite good credentials, the usual permits, etc."  

 

"And you found him satisfactory?"  

 

Without seeming to do so, Craddock marked the infinitesimal pause 

before Rowlandson replied. 

 



"Quite satisfactory."  

 

Craddock made use of a technique he had found efficacious before now. 

 

"No, no, Mr. Rowlandson," he said, gently shaking his head. "That's not 

really quite the case, is it?"  

 

"Well -" The Manager seemed slightly taken aback. 

 

"Come now, there was something wrong. What was it?"  

 

"That's just it. I don't know."  

 

"But you thought there was something wrong?"  

 

"Well - yes - I did... But I've nothing really to go upon. I shouldn't like my 

conjectures to be written down and quoted against me."  

 

Craddock smiled pleasantly. 

 

"I know just what you mean. You needn't worry. But I've got to get some 

idea of what this fellow, Scherz, was like. You suspected him of what?"  

 

Rowlandson said, rather reluctantly: "Well, there was trouble, once or 

twice, about the bills. Items charged that oughtn't to have been there."  

 

"You mean you suspected that he charged up certain items which didn't 

appear in the hotel records, and that he pocketed the difference when 

the bill was paid?"  



 

"Something like that... Put it at the best, there was gross carelessness 

on his part. Once or twice quite a big sum was involved. Frankly, I got 

our accountant to go over his books suspecting that he was - well, a 

wrong 'un, but though there were various mistakes and a good deal of 

slipshod method, the actual cash was quite correct. So I came to the 

conclusion that I must be mistaken."  

 

"Supposing you hadn't been wrong? Supposing Scherz had been 

helping himself to various small sums here and there, he could have 

covered himself, I suppose, by making good the money?"  

 

"Yes, if he had the money. But people who help themselves to 'small 

sums' - as you put it - are usually hard up for those sums and spend 

them offhand."  

 

"So, if he wanted money to replace missing sums, he would have had to 

get money - by a hold-up or other means?"  

 

"Yes. I wonder if this is his first attempt..."  

 

"Might be. It was certainly a very amateurish one. Is there anyone else 

he could have got money from? Any women in his life?"  

 

"One of the waitresses in the Grill. Her name's Myrna Harris."  

 

"I'd better have a talk with her."  

 



Myrna Harris was a pretty girl with a glorious head of red hair and a 

pert nose. 

 

She was alarmed and wary, and deeply conscious of the indignity of 

being interviewed by the police. 

 

"I don't know a thing about it, sir. Not a thing," she protested. "If I'd 

known what he was like I'd never have gone out with Rudi at all. 

Naturally, seeing as he worked in Reception here, I thought he was all 

right. Naturally I did. What I say is the hotel ought to be more careful 

when they employ people - especially foreigners. Because you never 

know where you are with foreigners. I suppose he might have been in 

with one of these gangs you read about?"  

 

"We think," said Craddock, "that he was working quite on his own."  

 

"Fancy - and him so quiet and respectable. You'd never think. Though 

there have been things missed now I come to think of it. A diamond 

brooch and a little gold locket, I believe. But I never dreamed that it 

could have been Rudi."  

 

"I'm sure you didn't," said Craddock. "Anyone might have been taken in. 

You knew him fairly well?"  

 

"I don't know that I'd say well."  

 

"But you were friendly?"  

 



"Oh, we were friendly - that's all, just friendly. Nothing serious at all. I'm 

always on my guard with foreigners, anyway. They've often got a way 

with them, but you never know, do you? Some of those Poles during the 

war! And even some of the Americans! Never let on they're married 

men until it's too late. Rudi talked big and all that - but I always took it 

with a grain of salt."  

 

Craddock seized on the phrase. 

 

"Talked big, did he? That's very interesting, Miss Harris. I can see 

you're going to be a lot of help to us. In what way did he talk big?"  

 

"Well, about how rich his people were in Switzerland  - and how 

important. But that didn't go with his being as short of money as he was. 

He always said that because of the money regulation he couldn't get 

money from Switzerland over here. That might be, I suppose, but his 

things weren't expensive. His clothes, I mean. They weren't really class. 

I think, too, that a lot of the stories he used to tell me were so much hot 

air. About climbing in the Alps, and saving people's lives on the edge of 

a glacier. Why, he turned quite giddy just going along the edge of 

Boulter's Gorge. Alps, indeed!"  

 

"You went out with him a good deal?"  

 

"Yes - well - yes, I did. He had awfully good manners and he knew how 

to - to look after a girl. The best seats at the pictures, always. And even 

flowers he'd buy me, sometimes. And he was just a lovely dancer - 

lovely."  

 



"Did he mention this Miss Blacklog to you at all?"  

 

"She comes in and lunches here sometimes, doesn't she? And she's 

stayed here once. No I don't think Rudi ever mentioned her. I didn't 

know he knew her."  

 

"Did he mention Chipping Cleghorn?"  

 

He thought a faintly wary look came into Myrna Harris's eyes but he 

couldn't be sure. 

 

"I don't think so... I think he did once ask about buses - what time they 

went - but I can't remember if that was Chipping Cleghorn or 

somewhere else. It wasn't just lately."  

 

He couldn't get more out of her. Rudi Scherz had seemed just as usual. 

She hadn't seen him the evening before. She'd no idea - no idea at all - 

she stressed the point, that Rudi Scherz was a crook. 

 

And probably, Craddock thought, that was quite true. 

 

Chapter 5 MISS BLACKLOG AND MISS BUNNER 

 

Little Paddocks was very much as Detective-Inspector Craddock had 

imagined it to be. He noted ducks and chickens and what had been until 

lately an attractive herbaceous border and in which a few late 

Michaelmas daisies showed a last dying splash of purple beauty. The 

lawn and the paths showed signs of neglect. 

 



Summing up, Detective-Inspector Craddock thought: "Probably not 

much money to spend on gardeners - fond of flowers and a good eye for 

planning and massing a border. House needs painting. Most houses do, 

nowadays. Pleasant little property."  

 

As Craddock's car stopped before the front door, Sergeant Fletcher 

came round the side of the house. Sergeant FIetcher looked like a 

guardsman, with an erect military bearing, and was able to impart 

several different meanings to the one monosyllable: "Sir."  

 

"So there you are, Fletcher."  

 

"Sir," said Sergeant Fletcher. 

 

"Anything to report?"  

 

"We've finished going over the house, sir, Scherz doesn't seem to have 

left any fingerprints anywhere. He wore gloves, of course. No signs of 

any of the doors or windows being forced to effect an entrance. He 

seems to have come out from Medenham on the bus, arriving here at six 

o'clock. Side door of the house was locked at 5:30, I understand. Looks 

as though he must have walked in through the front door. Miss Blacklog 

states that that door isn't usually locked until the house is shut up for 

the night. The maid, on the other hand, states that the front door was 

locked all the afternoon - but she'd say anything. Very temperamental 

you'll find her. Mittel-Europa refugee of some kind."  

 

"Difficult, is she?"  

 



"Sir!" said Sergeant Fletcher, with intense feeling. Craddock smiled. 

 

Fletcher resumed his report. 

 

"Lighting system is quite in order everywhere. We haven't spotted yet 

how he operated the lights. It was just the one circuit went. Drawing-

room and hall. Of course, nowadays the wall brackets and lamps 

wouldn't all be on one fuse - but this is an old-fashioned installation and 

wiring. Don't see how he could have tampered with the fuse-box 

because it's out by the scullery and he'd have had to go through the 

kitchen, so the maid would have seen him."  

 

"Unless she was in it with him?"  

 

"That's very possible. Both foreigners - and I wouldn't trust her a yard - 

not a yard."  

 

Craddock noticed two enormous frightened black eyes peering out of a 

window by the front door. The face, flattened against the pane, was 

hardly visible. 

 

"That her there?"  

 

"That's right, sir."  

 

The face disappeared. 

 

Craddock rang the front-door bell. 

 



After a long wait the door was opened by a good-looking young woman 

with chestnut hair and a bored expression. 

 

"Detective-Inspector Craddock," said Craddock. 

 

The young woman gave him a cool stare out of very attractive hazel 

eyes and said: "Come in. Miss Blacklog is expecting you."  

 

The hall, Craddock noted, was long and narrow and seemed almost 

incredibly full of doors. 

 

The young woman threw open a door on the left, and said: "Inspector 

Craddock, Aunt Letty. Mitzi wouldn't go to the door. She's shut herself 

up in the kitchen and she's making the most marvellous moaning noises. 

I shouldn't think we'd get any lunch."  

 

She added in an explanatory manner to Craddock: "She doesn't like the 

police," and withdrew, shutting the door behind her. 

 

Craddock advanced to meet the owner of Little Paddocks. 

 

He saw a tall active-looking woman of about sixty. Her grey hair had a 

slight natural wave and made a distinguished setting for an intelligent, 

resolute face. She had keen grey eyes and a square determined chin. 

There was a surgical dressing on her left ear. She wore no make-up 

and was plainly dressed in a well-cut tweed coat and skirt and pullover. 

Round the neck of the latter she wore, rather unexpectedly, a set of old-

fashioned cameos - a Victorian touch which seemed to hint at a 

sentimental streak not otherwise apparent. 



 

Close beside her, with an eager round face and untidy hair escaping 

from a hair net, was a woman of about the same age whom Craddock 

had no difficulty in recognising as the 'Dora Bunner - companion' of 

Constable Legg's notes - to which the latter had added an off-the-

record commentary of "Scatty!"  

 

Miss Blacklog spoke in a pleasant well-bred voice. 

 

"Good morning, Inspector Craddock. This is my friend, Miss Bunner, 

who helps me run the house. Won't you sit down? You won't smoke, I 

suppose?"  

 

"Not on duty, I'm afraid, Miss Blacklog."  

 

"What a shame!"  

 

Craddock's eyes took in the room with a quick, practised glance. 

Typical Victorian double drawing-room. Two long windows in this room, 

built out bay window in the other... chairs... sofa... centre table with a 

big bowl of chrysanthemums - another bowl in window - all fresh and 

pleasant without much originality. The only incongruous note was a 

small silver vase with dead violets in it on a table near the archway into 

the further room. Since he could not imagine Miss Blacklog tolerating 

dead flowers in a room, he imagined it to be the only indication that 

something out of the way had occurred to distract the routine of a well-

run household. 

 



He said: "I take it, Miss Blacklog, that this is the room in which the - 

incident occurred?"  

 

"Yes."  

 

"And you should have seen it last night," Miss Bunner exclaimed. "Such 

a mess. Two little tables knocked over, and the leg off one - people 

barging about in the dark - and someone put down a lighted cigarette 

and burnt one of the best bits of furniture. People - young people 

especially, are so - careless about these things... Luckily none of the 

china got broken -" Miss Blacklog interrupted gently but firmly: "Dora, 

all these things, vexatious as they may be, are only trifles. It will be best, 

I think, if we just answer Inspector Craddock's questions."  

 

"Thank you, Miss Blacklog. I shall come to what happened last night, 

presently. First of all I want you to tell me when you first saw the dead 

man - Rudi Scherz."  

 

"Rudi Scherz?" Miss Blacklog looked slightly surprised. "Is that his 

name? Somehow, I thought... Oh, well, it doesn't matter. My first 

encounter with him was when I was in Medenham Spa for a day's 

shopping about - let me see, about three weeks ago. We - Miss Bunner 

and I - were having lunch at the Royal Spa Hotel. As we were just 

leaving after lunch, I heard my name spoken. It was this young man. He 

said: 'It is Miss Blacklog, is it not?' And went on to say that perhaps I did 

not remember him, but that he was the son of the proprietor of the Hotel 

des Alpes at Montreux where my sister and I had stayed for nearly a 

year during the war."  

 



"The Hotel des Alpes, Montreux," noted Craddock. "And did you 

remember him, Miss Blacklog?"  

 

"No, I didn't. Actually I had no recollection of ever having seen him 

before. These boys at hotel reception desks all look exactly alike. We 

had had a very pleasant time at Montreux and the proprietor there had 

been extremely obliging, so I tried to be as civil as possible and said I 

hoped he was enjoying being in England, and he said, yes, that his 

father had sent him over for six months to learn the hotel business. It all 

seemed quite natural."  

 

"And your next encounter?"  

 

"About - yes, it must have been ten days ago, he suddenly turned up 

here. I was very surprised to see him. He apologised for troubling me, 

but said I was the only person he knew in England. He told me that he 

urgently needed money to return to Switzerland as his mother was 

dangerously ill."  

 

"But Letty didn't give it to him," Miss Bunner put in breathlessly. 

 

"It was a thoroughly fishy story," said Miss Blacklog, with vigour. "I 

made up my mind that he was definitely a wrong 'un. That story about 

wanting the money to return to Switzerland was nonsense. His father 

could easily have wired for arrangements to have been made in this 

country. These hotel people are all in with each other. I suspected that 

he'd been embezzling money or something of that kind." She paused 

and said dryly: "In case you think I'm hardhearted, I was secretary for 



many years to a big financier and one becomes wary about appeals for 

money. I know simply all the hard luck stories there are. 

 

"The only thing that did surprise me," she added thoughtfully, "was that 

he gave in so easily. He went away at once without any more argument. 

It's as though he had never expected to get the money."  

 

"Do you think now, looking back on it, that his coming was really by way 

of a pretext to spy out the land?"  

 

Miss Blacklog nodded her head vigorously. 

 

"That's exactly what I do think - now. He made certain remarks as I let 

him out - about the rooms. He said, 'You have a very nice dining-room 

(which of course it isn't - it's a horrid dark little room) just as an excuse 

to look inside. And then he sprang forward and unfastened the front 

door, said, 'Let me.' I think now he wanted to have a look at the 

fastening. Actually, like most people round here, we never lock the 

front door until it gets dark. Anyone could walk in."  

 

"And the side door? There is a side door to the garden, I understand?"  

 

"Yes. I went out through it to shut up the ducks not long before the 

people arrived."  

 

"Was it locked when you went out?"  

 

Miss Blacklog frowned. 

 



"I can't remember... I think so. I certainly locked it when I came in."  

 

"That would be about quarter-past six?"  

 

"Somewhere about then."  

 

"And the front door?"  

 

"That's not usually locked until later."  

 

"Then Scherz could have walked in quite easily that way. Or he could 

have slipped in whilst you were out shutting up the ducks. He'd already 

spied out the lie of the land and had probably noted various places of 

concealment - cupboards, etc. Yes, that all seems quite clear."  

 

"I beg your pardon, it isn't at all clear," said Miss Blacklog. "Why on 

earth should anyone take all that elaborate trouble to come and burgle 

this house and stage that silly sort of holdup?"  

 

"Do you keep much money in the house, Miss Blacklog?"  

 

"About five pounds in that desk there, and perhaps a pound or two in 

my purse."  

 

"Jewellery?"  

 

"A couple of rings and brooches and the cameos I'm wearing. You must 

agree with me, Inspector, that the whole thing's absurd."  

 



"It wasn't burglary at all," cried Miss Bunner. "I've told you so, Letty, all 

along. It was revenge! Because you wouldn't give him that money! He 

deliberately shot at you - twice."  

 

"Ah," said Craddock. "We'll come now to last night. What happened 

exactly, Miss Blacklog? Tell me in your own words as nearly as you can 

remember."  

 

Miss Blacklog reflected a moment. 

 

"The clock struck," she said. "The one on the mantelpiece. I remember 

saying that if anything were going to happen it would have to happen 

soon. And then the clock struck. We all listened to it without saying 

anything. It chimes, you know. It chimed the two quarters and then, 

quite suddenly, the lights went out."  

 

"What lights were on?"  

 

"The wall brackets in here and the further room. The standard lamp and 

the two small reading lamps weren't on."  

 

"Was there a flash first, or a noise when the lights went out?"  

 

"I don't think so."  

 

"I'm sure there was a flash," said Dora Bunner. "And a crackling noise. 

Dangerous!"  

 

"And then, Miss Blacklog?"  



 

"The door opened" 

 

"Which door? There are two in the room."  

 

"Oh, this door in here. The one in the other room doesn't open. It's a 

dummy. The door opened and there he was - a masked man with a 

revolver. It just seemed too fantastic for words, but of course at the 

time I just thought it was a silly joke. He said something - I forget what" 

 

"Hands up or I shoot!" supplied Miss Bunner, dramatically. 

 

"Something like that," said Miss Blacklog, rather doubtfully. 

 

"And you all put your hands up?" 

 

"Oh, yes," said Miss Bunner. "We all did. I mean, it was part of it."  

 

"I didn't," said Miss Blacklog, crisply. "It seemed so utterly silly. And I 

was annoyed by the whole thing."  

 

"And then?"  

 

"The flashlight was right in my eyes. It dazzled me. And then, quite 

incredibly, I heard a bullet whizz past me and hit the wall by my head. 

Somebody shrieked and then I felt a burning pain in my ear and heard 

the second report."  

 

"It was terrifying," put in Miss Bunner. 



 

"And what happened next, Miss Blacklog?"  

 

"It's difficult to say - I was so staggered by the pain and the surprise. 

The - the figure turned away and seemed to stumble and then there was 

another shot and his torch went out and everybody began pushing and 

calling out. All banging into each other."  

"Where were you standing, Miss Blacklog?"  

 

"She was over by the table. She'd got that vase of violets in her hand," 

said Miss Bunner breathlessly. 

 

"I was over here," Miss Blacklog went over to the small table by the 

archway. "Actually it was the cigarette-box I'd got in my hand."  

 

Inspector Craddock examined the wall behind her. The two bullet holes 

showed plainly. The bullets themselves had been extracted and had 

been sent for comparison with the revolver. 

 

He said quietly: "You had a very near escape, Miss Blacklog."  

 

"He did shoot at her," said Miss Bunner. "Deliberately at her! I saw him. 

He turned the flash round on everybody until he found her and then he 

held it right at her and just fired at her. He meant to kill you, Letty."  

 

"Dora dear, you've just got that into your head from mulling the whole 

thing over and over."  

 



"He shot at you," repeated Dora stubbornly. "He meant to shoot you 

and when he'd missed, he shot himself. I'm certain that's the way it 

was!"  

 

"I don't think he meant to shoot himself for a minute," said Miss 

Blacklog. "He wasn't the kind of man who shoots himself."  

 

"You tell me, Miss Blacklog, that until the revolver was fired you thought 

the whole business was a joke?"  

 

"Naturally. What else could I think it was?"  

 

"Who do you think was the author of this joke?"  

 

"You thought Patrick had done it at first," Dora Bunner reminded her. 

 

"Patrick?" asked the Inspector sharply. 

 

"My young cousin, Patrick Simmons," Miss Blacklog continued sharply, 

annoyed with her friend. "It did occur to me when I saw this 

advertisement that it might be some attempt at humour on his part, but 

he denied it absolutely."  

 

"And then you were worried, Letty," said Miss Bunner. "You were 

worried, although you pretended not to be. And you were quite right to 

be worried. It said a murder is announced - and it was announced - your 

murder! And if the man hadn't missed, you would have been murdered. 

And then where should we all be?"  

 



Dora Bunner was trembling as she spoke. Her face was puckered up 

and she looked as though she were going to cry. 

 

Miss Blacklog patted her on the shoulder. "It's all right, Dora dear - 

don't get excited. It's so bad for you. Everything's quite all right. We've 

had a nasty experience, but it's over now." She added, "You must pull 

yourself together for my sake, Dora. I rely on you, you know, to keep the 

house going. Isn't it the day for the laundry to come?"  

 

"Oh, dear me, Letty, how fortunate you reminded me! I wonder if they'll 

return that missing pillow-case. I must make a note in the book about it. 

I'll go and see to it at once."  

 

"And take those violets away," said Miss Blacklog. "There's nothing I 

hate more than dead flowers."  

 

"What a pity. I picked them fresh yesterday. They haven't lasted at all - 

oh, dear, I must have forgotten to put any water in the vase. Fancy that! 

I'm always forgetting things. Now I must go and see about the laundry. 

They might be here any moment."  

 

She bustled away, looking quite happy again. 

 

"She's not very strong," said Miss Blacklog, "and excitements are bad 

for her. Is there anything more you want to know, Inspector?"  

 

"I just want to know exactly how many people make up your household 

here and something about them."  

 



"Yes, well in addition to myself and Dora Bunner, I have two young 

cousins living here at present, Patrick and Julia Simmons."  

 

"Cousins? Not a nephew and niece?"  

 

"No. They call me Aunt Letty, but actually they are distant cousins. 

Their mother was my second cousin."  

 

"Have they always made their home with you?"  

 

"Oh, dear no, only for the last two months. They lived in the South of 

France before the war. Patrick went into the Navy and Julia, I believe, 

was in one of the Ministries. She was at Llandudno. When the war was 

over their mother wrote and asked me if they could possibly come to 

me as paying guests - Julia is training as a dispenser in Milchester 

General Hospital, Patrick is studying for an engineering degree at 

Milchester University. Milchester, as you know, is only fifty minutes by 

bus, and I was very glad to have them here. This house is really too 

large for me. They pay a small sum for board and lodging and it all 

works out very well." She added with a smile, "I like having somebody 

young about the place."  

 

"Then there is a PhillipaHaymes, I believe?"  

 

"Yes. She works as an assistant gardener at Dayas Hall, Mrs. Lucas's 

place. The cottage there is occupied by the old gardener and his wife 

and Mrs. Lucas asked if I could billet her here. She's a very nice girl. 

Her husband was killed in Italy, and she has a boy of eight who is at a 

prep school and whom I have arranged to have here in the holidays."  



 

"And by way of domestic help?"  

 

"A jobbing gardener comes in on Tuesdays and Fridays. A Mrs. Huggins 

from the village comes up five mornings a week and I have a foreign 

refugee with a most unpronounceable name as a kind of lady cook help. 

You will find Mitzi rather difficult, I'm afraid. She has a kind of 

persecution mania."  

 

Craddock nodded. He was conscious in his own mind of yet another of 

Constable Legg's invaluable commentaries. Having appended the word 

"scatty" to Dora Bunner, and 'All right' to Blacklog, he had 

embellished Mitzi's record with the one word 'Liar.'  

 

As though she had read his mind Miss Blacklog said: "Please don't be 

too prejudiced against the poor thing because she's a liar. I do really 

believe that, like so many liars, there is a real substratum of truth 

behind her lies. I mean that though, to take an instance, her atrocity 

stories have grown and grown until every kind of unpleasant story that 

has ever appeared in print has happened to her or her relations 

personally, she did have a bad shock initially and did see one, at least, 

of her relations killed. I think a lot of these displaced persons feel, 

perhaps justly, that their claim to our notice and sympathy lies in their 

atrocity value and so they exaggerate and invent."  

 

She added: "Quite frankly, Mitzi is a maddening person. She 

exasperates and infuriates us all, she is suspicious and sulky, is 

perpetually having 'feelings' and thinking herself insulted. But in spite 



of it all, I really am sorry for her." She smiled. "And also, when she 

wants to, she can cook very nicely."  

 

"I'll try not to ruffle her more than I can help," said Craddock soothingly. 

"Was that Miss Julia Simmons who opened the door to me?"  

 

"Yes. Would you like to see her now? Patrick has gone out. PhillipaHaymes 

 you will find working at Dayas Hall."  

 

"Thank you, Miss Blacklog. I'd like to see Miss Simmons now if I may." 

 

Chapter 6 JULIA, MITZI, AND PATRICK 

 

Julia, when she came into the room, and sat down in the chair vacated 

by Blacklog, had an air of composure that Craddock for some 

reason found annoying. She fixed a limpid gaze on him and waited for 

his questions. 

 

Miss Blacklog had tactfully left the room. 

 

"Please tell me about last night. Miss Simmons."  

 

"Last night?" murmured Julia with a blank stare. "Oh, we all slept like 

logs. Reaction, I suppose."  

 

"I mean last night from six o'clock onwards."  

 

"Oh, I see. Well, a lot of tiresome people came -" 

 



"They were?"  

 

She gave him another limpid stare. "Don't you know all this already?"  

 

"I'm asking the questions, Miss Simmons," said Craddock pleasantly. 

 

"My mistake. I always find repetitions so dreary. Apparently you don't... 

Well, there was Colonel and Mrs. Easterbrook, Miss Hinchliffe and Miss 

Murgatroyd, Mrs. Swettenham and Edmund Swettenham, and Mrs. 

Harmon, the Vicar's wife. They arrived in that order, and if you want to 

know what they said - they all said the same things in turn. 'I see you've 

got your central heating on' and 'What lovely chrysanthemums!'" 

 

Craddock bit his lip. The mimicry was good. 

 

"The exception was Mrs. Harmon. She's rather a pet. She came in with 

her hat falling off and her shoelaces untied and she asked straight out 

when the murder was going to happen? It embarrassed everybody 

because they'd all been pretending they'd dropped in by chance. Aunt 

Letty said in her dry way that it was due to happen quite soon. And then 

that clock chimed and just as it finished, the lights went out, the door 

was flung open and a masked figure said, 'Stick 'em up, guys,' or 

something like that. It was exactly like a bad film. Really quite ridiculous. 

And then he fired two shots at Aunt Letty and suddenly it wasn't 

ridiculous any more."  

 

"Where was everybody when this happened?"  

 



"When the lights went out? Well, just standing about, you know. Mrs. 

Harmon was sitting on the sofa - Hinch (that's Miss Hinchliffe) had taken 

up a manly stance in front of the fireplace."  

 

"You were all in this room, or the far room?"  

 

"Mostly, I think, in this room. Patrick had gone into the other to get the 

sherry. I think Colonel Easterbrook went after him, but I don't really 

know. We were - well -as I said, just standing about."  

 

"Where were you yourself?"  

 

"I think I was over by the window. Aunt Letty went to get the 

cigarettes."  

 

"On that table by the archway?"  

 

"Yes - and then the lights went out and the bad film started."  

 

"The man had a powerful torch. What did he do with it?"  

 

"Well, he shone it on us. Horribly dazzling. It just made you blink."  

 

"I want you to answer this very carefully, Miss Simmons. Did he hold the 

torch steady, or did he move it about?"  

 

Julia considered. Her manner was now definitely less weary. 

 



"He moved it," she said slowly. "Like a spotlight in a dance hall. It was 

full in my eyes and then it went on round the room and then the shots 

came. Two shots."  

 

"And then?"  

 

"He whirled round - and Mitzi began to scream like a siren from 

somewhere and his torch went out and there was another shot. And 

then the door closed (it does, you know, slowly, with a whining noise - 

quite uncanny) and there we were all in the dark, not knowing what to 

do, and poor Bunny squealing like a rabbit and Mitzi going all out 

across the hall."  

 

"Would it be your opinion that the man shot himself deliberately, or do 

you think he stumbled and the revolver went off accidentally?"  

 

"I haven't the faintest idea. The whole thing was so stagey. Actually I 

thought it was still some silly joke - until I saw the blood from Letty's ear. 

But even if you were actually going to fire a revolver to make the thing 

more real, you'd be careful to fire it well above someone's head, 

wouldn't you?"  

 

"You would indeed. Do you think he could see clearly who he was firing 

at? I mean, was Miss Blacklog clearly outlined in the light of the torch?"  

 

"I've no idea. I wasn't looking at her. I was looking at the man."  

 

"What I'm getting at is - do you think the man was deliberately aiming at 

her - at her in particular, I mean?"  



 

Julia seemed a little startled by the idea. 

 

"You mean deliberately picking on Aunt Letty? Oh, I shouldn't think so... 

After all, if he wanted to take a pot shot at Aunt Letty, there would be 

heaps of more suitable opportunities. There would be no point in 

collecting all the friends and neighbours just to make it more difficult. 

He could have shot her from behind a hedge in the good old Irish 

fashion any day of the week, and probably got away with it."  

 

And that, thought Craddock, was a very complete reply to Dora 

Bunner's suggestion of a deliberate attack on Blacklog. 

 

He said with a sigh, "Thank you, Miss Simmons. I'd better go and see 

Mitzi now."  

 

"Mind her fingernails," warned Julia. "She's a tartar!"  

 

II 

 

Craddock, with Fletcher in attendance, found Mitzi in the kitchen. She 

was rolling pastry and looked up suspiciously as he entered. 

 

Her black hair hung over her eyes; she looked sullen, and the purple 

jumper and brilliant green skirt she wore were not becoming to her 

pasty complexion. 

 

"What do you come in my kitchen for, Mr. Policeman? You are police, 

yes? Always, always there is persecution - ah! I should be used to it by 



now. They say it is different here in England, but no, it is just the same. 

You come to torture me, yes, to make me say things, but I shall say 

nothing. You will tear off my fingernails, and put lighted matches on my 

skin - oh, yes, and worse than that. But I will not speak, do you hear? I 

shall say nothing - nothing at all. And you will send me away to a 

concentration camp, and I shall not care."  

 

Craddock looked at her thoughtfully, selecting what was likely to be the 

best method of attack. Finally he sighed and said: 

 

"O.K. then, get your hat and coat."  

 

"What is that you say?" Mitzi looked startled. 

 

"Get your hat and coat and come along. I haven't got my nail-pulling 

apparatus and the rest of the bag of tricks with me. We keep all that 

down at the station. Got the handcuffs handy, Fletcher?"  

 

"Sir!" said Sergeant Fletcher with appreciation. 

 

"But I do not want to come," screeched Mitzi, backing away from him. 

 

"Then you'll answer civil questions civilly. If you like, you can have a 

solicitor present."  

 

"A lawyer? I do not like a lawyer. I do not want a lawyer."  

 

She put the rolling pin down, dusted her hands on a cloth and sat down. 

 



"What do you want to know?" she asked sulkily. 

 

"I want your account of what happened here last night."  

 

"You know very well what happened."  

 

"I want your account of it."  

 

"I tried to go away. Did she tell you that? When I saw that in the paper 

saying about murder. I wanted to go away. She would not let me. She is 

very hard - not at all sympathetic. She made me stay. But I knew - I 

knew what would happen. I knew I should be murdered."  

 

"Well, you weren't murdered, were you?"  

 

"No," admitted Mitzi grudgingly. 

 

"Come now, tell me what happened."  

 

"I was nervous. Oh, I was nervous. All that evening. I hear things. 

People moving about. Once I think someone is in the hall moving 

stealthily - but it is only that PhillipaHaymes coming in through the side 

door (so as not to dirty the front steps, she says. Much she cares!). She 

is a Nazi herself, that one, with her fair hair and her blue eyes, so 

superior and looking at me and thinking that I - I am only dirt -" 

 

"Never mind PhillipaHaymes." 

 



"Who does she think she is? Has she had expensive university 

education like I have? Has she a degree in Economics? No, she is just a 

paid labourer. She digs and mows grass and is paid so much every 

Saturday. Who is she to call herself a lady?"  

 

"Never mind  PhillipaHaymes, I said. Go on."  

 

"I take the sherry and the glasses, and the little pastries that I have 

made so nice into the drawing-room. Then the bell rings and I answer 

the door. Again and again I answer the door. It is degrading - but I do it. 

And then I go back into the pantry and I start to polish the silver, and I 

think it will be very handy, that, because if someone comes to kill me, I 

have there close at hand the big carving knife, all sharp."  

 

"Very foresighted of you."  

 

"And then, suddenly - I hear shots. I think: 'It has come - it is 

happening.' I run through the dining-room (the other door - it will not 

open) I stand a moment to listen and then there comes another shot and 

a big thud, out there in the hall, and I turn the door handle, but it is 

locked outside. I am shut in there like a rat in a trap. And I go mad with 

fear. I scream and I scream and I beat upon the door. And at last - at 

last - they turn the key and let me out. And then I bring candles, many 

many candles - and the lights go on, and I see blood - blood! Ach, Gott 

im Himmel, the blood! It is not the first time I have seen blood. My little 

brother - I see him killed before my eyes - I see blood in the street - 

people shot, dying - I -" 

 

"Yes," said Inspector Craddock. "Thank you very much."  



 

"And now," said Mitzi dramatically, "you can arrest me and take me to 

prison!"  

 

"Not today," said Inspector Craddock. 

 

III 

 

As Craddock and Fletcher went through the hall to the front door it was 

flung open and a tall handsome young man almost collided with them. 

 

"Sleuths, as I live," cried the young man. 

 

"Mr. Patrick Simmons?"  

 

"Quite right, Inspector. You're the Inspector, aren't you, and the other's 

the Sergeant?"  

 

"You are quite right, Mr. Simmons. Can I have a word with you, please?"  

 

"I am innocent, Inspector. I swear I am innocent."  

 

"Now then, Mr. Simmons, don't play the fool. I've a good many other 

people to see and I don't want to waste time. What's this room? Can we 

go in here?"  

 

"It's the so-called study - but nobody studies."  

 

"I was told that you were studying?" said Craddock. 



 

"I found I couldn't concentrate on mathematics, so I came home."  

 

In a businesslike manner Inspector Craddock demanded full name, age, 

details of war service. 

 

"And now, Mr. Simmons, will you describe what happened last night?"  

 

"We killed the fatted calf, Inspector. That is, Mitzi set her hand to 

making savoury pastries. Aunt Letty opened a new bottle of sherry -" 

 

Craddock interrupted. "A new bottle? Was there an old one?"  

 

"Yes. Half full. But Aunt Letty didn't seem to fancy it."  

 

"Was she nervous, then?"  

 

"Oh, not really. She's extremely sensible. It was old Bunny, I think, who 

had put the wind up her - prophesying disaster all day."  

 

"Miss Bunner was definitely apprehensive, then?"  

 

"Oh, yes, she enjoyed herself thoroughly."  

 

"She took the advertisement seriously?"  

 

"It scared her into fits."  

 



"Miss Blacklog seems to have thought, when she first read that 

advertisement, that you had had something to do with it. Why was 

that?"  

 

"Ah, sure, I get blamed for everything round here!" 

 

"You didn't have anything to do with it, did you, Mr. Simmons?"  

 

"Me? Never in the world."  

 

"Had you ever seen or spoken to this Rudi Scherz?"  

 

"Never seen him in my life."  

 

"It was the kind of joke you might have played, though?"  

 

"Who's been telling you that? Just because I once made Bunny an 

apple-pie bed - and sent Mitzi a postcard saying the Gestapo was on 

her track -" 

 

"Just give me your account of what happened."  

 

"I'd just gone into the small drawing-room to fetch the drinks when, Hey 

Presto, the lights went out. I turned round and there's a fellow standing 

in the doorway saying, 'Stick your hands up,' and everybody gasping 

and squealing, and just when I'm thinking - can I rush him? he starts 

firing a revolver and then crash down he goes and his torch goes out 

and we're in the dark again, and Colonel Easterbrook starts shouting 



orders in his barrack-room voice. 'Lights,' he says, and will my lighter 

go on? No, it won't as is the way of those cussed inventions."  

 

"Did it seem to you that the intruder was definitely aiming at Miss 

Blacklog?"  

 

"Ah, how could I tell? I should say he just loosed off his revolver for the 

fun of the thing - and then found, maybe, he'd gone too far."  

 

"And shot himself?"  

 

"It could be. When I saw the face of him, he looked like the kind of little 

pasty thief who might easily lose his nerve."  

 

"And you're sure you had never seen him before?"  

 

"Never."  

 

"Thank you, Mr. Simmons. I shall want to interview the other people 

who were here last night. Which would be the best order in which to 

take them?"  

 

"Well, our PhillipaHaymes -  works at Dayas Hall. The gates of it 

are nearly opposite this gate, After that, the Swettenhams are the 

nearest. Anyone will tell you."  

 

Chapter 7 AMONG THOSE PRESENT 

 



Dayas hall had certainly suffered during the war years. Couch grass 

grew enthusiastically over what had once been an asparagus bed, as 

evidenced by a few waving tufts of asparagus foliage. Groundsel, 

bindweed and other garden pests showed every sign of vigorous 

growth. 

 

A portion of the kitchen garden bore evidence of having been reduced 

to discipline and here Craddock found a sour-looking old man leaning 

pensively on a spade. 

 

"It's Mrs. 'Aymes you want? I couldn't say where you'd find 'er. 'As 'er 

own ideas, she 'as, about what she'll do. Not one to take advice. I could 

show her - show 'er willing - but what's the good, won't listen these 

young ladies won't! Think they know everything because they've put on 

breeches and gone for a ride on a tractor. But it's gardening that's 

needed here. And that isn't learned in a day. Gardening, that's what this 

place needs."  

 

"It looks as though it does," said Craddock. 

 

The old man chose to take this remark as an aspersion. 

 

"Now look here, mister, what do you suppose I can do with a place this 

size? Three men and a boy, that's what it used to 'ave. And that's what it 

wants. There's not many men could put in the work on it that I do. 'Ere 

sometimes I am till eight o'clock at night. Eight o'clock."  

 

"What do you work by? An oil lamp."  

 



"Naterally I don't mean this time o' year. Naterally. Summer evenings 

I'm talking about."  

 

"Oh," said Craddock, "I'd better go and look for PhillipaHaymes."  

 

The rustic displayed some interest. 

 

"What are you wanting 'er for? Police, aren't you? She been in trouble, 

or is it the do there was up to Little Paddocks? Masked men bursting in 

and holding up a roomful of people with a revolver. An' that sort of thing 

wouldn't 'ave 'appened afore the war. Deserters, that's what it is. 

Desperate men roaming the countryside. Why don't the military round 

'em up?"  

 

"I've no idea," said Craddock. "I suppose this holdup caused a lot of 

talk?"  

 

"That it did. What's us coming to? That's what Ned Barker said. Comes 

of going to the pictures so much, he said. But Tom Riley he says it 

comes of letting these furriners run about loose. And depend on it, he 

says, that girl as cooks up there for Miss Blacklog and 'as such a nasty 

temper - she's in it, he said. She's a communist or worse, he says, and 

we don't like that sort 'ere. And Marlene, who's behind the bar, you 

understand, she will 'ave it that there must be something very valuable 

up at Miss Blacklog's. Not that you'd think it, she says, for I'm sure Miss 

Blacklog goes about as plain as plain, except for them great rows of 

false pearls she wears. And then she says - Supposin' as them pearls is 

real, and Florrie (what's old Bellamy's daughter) she says, 'Nonsense,' 

she says -' noovo ar - that's what they are - costume jewellery,' she says. 



Costume jewellery - that's a fine way of labelling a string of false pearls. 

Roman pearls; the gentry used to call 'em once - and Parisian diamonds 

- my wife was a lady's maid and I know. But what does it all mean - just 

glass! I suppose it's 'costume jewellery' that young Miss Simmons 

wears  - gold ivy leaves and dogs and such like. 'Tisn't often you see a 

real bit of gold nowadays - even wedding rings they make of this grey 

plattinghum stuff. Shabby, I call it - for all that it costs the earth."  

 

Old Ashe paused for breath and then continued: 

 

"'Miss Blacklog don't keep much money in the 'ouse, that I do know,' 

says Jim Huggins, speaking up. He should know, for it's his wife as 

goes up and does for 'em at Little Paddocks, and she's a woman as 

knows most of what's going on. Nosey, if you take me."  

 

"Did he say what Mrs. Huggins' view was?"  

 

"That Mitzi's mixed up in it, that's what she thinks. Awful temper she 'as, 

and the airs she gives herself! Called Mrs. Huggins a working woman to 

her face the other morning."  

 

Craddock stood a moment, checking over in his orderly mind the 

substance of the old gardener's remarks. 

 

It gave him a good cross-section of rural opinion in Chipping Cleghorn, 

but he didn't think there was anything to help him in his task. He turned 

away and the old man called after him grudgingly: 

 



"Maybe you'd find her in the apple orchard. She's younger than I am for 

getting the apples down."  

 

And sure enough in the apple orchard Craddock found  PhillipaHaymes. 

His first view was a pair of nice legs encased in breeches sliding easily 

down the trunk of a tree. Then PhillipaHaymes, her face flushed, her fair hair 

ruffled by the branches, stood looking at him in a startled fashion. 

 

"Make a good Rosalind," Craddock thought automatically, for 

Detective-Inspector Craddock was a Shakespeare enthusiast and had 

played the part of the melancholy Jaques with great success in a 

performance of As You Like It for the Police Orphanage. 

 

A moment later he amended his view.  PhillipaHaymes was too wooden 

for Rosalind, her fairness and her impassivity were intensely English, 

but English of the twentieth rather than of the sixteenth century. Well-

bred, unemotional English, without a sparkle of mischief. 

 

"Good morning,  PhillipaHaymes. I'm sorry if I startled you. I'm Detective-

Inspector Craddock of the Middleshire Police. I wanted to have a word 

with you."  

 

"About last night?"  

 

"Yes."  

 

"Will it take long? Shall we -" 

 

She looked about her rather doubtfully. 



 

Craddock indicated a fallen tree trunk. 

 

"Rather informal," he said pleasantly, "but I don't want to interrupt your 

work longer than necessary."  

 

"Thank you."  

 

"It's just for the record. You came in from work at what time last night?"  

 

"At about half-past five. I'd stayed about twenty minutes later in order 

to finish some watering in the greenhouse."  

 

"You came in by which door?"  

 

"The side door. One cuts across by the ducks and the hen-house from 

the drive. It saves you going round, and besides it avoids dirtying up the 

front porch. I'm in rather a mucky state sometimes."  

 

"You always come in that way?"  

 

"Yes."  

 

"The door was unlocked?"  

 

"Yes. During the summer it's usually wide open. This time of the year it's 

shut but not locked. We all go out and in a good deal that way. I locked 

it when I came in."  

 



"Do you always do that?"  

 

"I've been doing it for the last week. You see, it gets dark at six. Miss 

Blacklog goes out to shut up the ducks and the hens sometime in the 

evening, but she very often goes out through the kitchen door."  

 

"And you are quite sure you did lock the side door this time?"  

 

"I really am quite sure about that."  

 

"Quite so, PhillipaHaymes. And what did you do when you came in?"  

 

"Kicked off my muddy footwear and went upstairs and had a bath and 

changed. Then I came down and found that a kind of party was in 

progress. I hadn't known anything about this funny advertisement until 

then."  

 

"Now please describe just what occurred when the hold-up happened."  

 

"Well, the lights went out suddenly" 

 

"Where were you?"  

 

"By the mantelpiece. I was searching for my lighter which I thought I 

had put down there. The lights went out and everybody giggled. Then 

the door was flung open and this man shone a torch on us and 

nourished a revolver and told us to put our hands up."  

 

"Which you proceeded to do?"  



 

"Well, I didn't, actually. I thought it was just fun, and I was tired and I 

didn't think I needed really to put them up."  

 

"In fact you were bored by the whole thing?"  

 

"I was, rather. And then the revolver went off. The shots sounded 

deafening and I was really frightened. The torch went whirling round 

and dropped and went out, and then Mitzi started screaming. It was just 

like a pig being killed."  

 

"Did you find the torch very dazzling?"  

 

"No, not particularly. It was quite a strong one, though. It lit up Miss 

Bunner for a moment and she looked quite like a turnip ghost - you 

know, all white and staring with her mouth open and her eyes starting 

out of her head."  

 

"The man moved the torch?"  

 

"Oh, yes, he played it all round the room."  

 

"As though he were looking for someone?"  

 

"Not particularly, I should say."  

 

"And after that, PhillipaHaymes?"  

 

 PhillipaHaymes frowned. 



 

"Oh, it was all a terrible muddle and confusion. Edmund Swettenham 

and Patrick Simmons switched on their lighters and they went out into 

the hall and we followed, and someone opened the dining-room door - 

the lights hadn't fused there - and Edmund Swettenham gave Mitzi a 

terrific slap on the cheek and brought her out of her screaming fit, and 

after that it wasn't so bad."  

 

"You saw the body of the dead man?"  

 

"Yes."  

 

"Was he known to you? Had you ever seen him before?" 

 

"Never."  

 

"Have you any opinion as to whether his death was accidental, or do 

you think he shot himself deliberately?"  

 

"I haven't the faintest idea."  

 

"You didn't see him when he came to the house previously?"  

 

"No. I believe it was in the middle of the morning and I shouldn't have 

been there. I'm out all day."  

 

"Thank you, PhillipaHaymes. One thing more. You haven't any valuable 

jewellery? Rings, bracelets, anything of that kind?"  

 



PhillipaHaymes shook her head. 

 

"My engagement ring - a couple of brooches."  

 

"And as far as you know, there was nothing of particular value in the 

house?" 

 

"No. I mean there is some quite nice silver - but nothing out of the 

ordinary."  

 

"Thank you, PhillipaHaymes."  

 

II 

 

As Craddock retraced his steps through the kitchen garden he came 

face to face with a large red-faced lady, carefully corseted. 

 

"Good morning," she said belligerently. "What do you want here?"  

 

"Mrs. Lucas? I am Detective-Inspector Craddock."  

 

"Oh, that's who you are. I beg your pardon. I don't like strangers forcing 

their way into my garden wasting the gardeners' time. But I quite 

understand you have to do your duty."  

 

"Quite so."  

 

"May I ask if we are to expect a repetition of that outrage last night at 

Miss Blacklog's? Is it a gang?"  



 

"We are satisfied, Mrs. Lucas, that it was not the work of a gang."  

 

"There are far too many robberies nowadays. The police are getting 

slack." Craddock did not reply. "I suppose you've been talking to 

 PhillipaHaymes?"  

 

"I wanted her account as an eyewitness."  

 

"You couldn't have waited until one o'clock, I suppose? After all, it 

would be fairer to question her in her time, rather than in mine..."  

 

"I'm anxious to get back to headquarters."  

 

"Not that one expects consideration nowadays. Or a decent day's work. 

On duty late, half an hour's pottering. A break for elevenses at ten 

o'clock. No work done at all the moment the rain starts. When you want 

the lawn mown there's always something wrong with the mower. And 

off duty five or ten minutes before the proper time."  

 

"I understood from  PhillipaHaymes that she left here at twenty minutes 

past five yesterday instead of five o'clock."  

 

"Oh, I dare say she did. Give her her due,PhillipaHaymes is quite keen on 

her work, though there have been days when I have come out here and 

not been able to find her anywhere. She is a lady by birth, of course, 

and one feels it's one's duty to do something for these poor young war 

widows. Not that it isn't very inconvenient. Those long school holidays 

and the arrangement is that she has extra time off then. I told her that 



there are really excellent camps nowadays where children can be sent 

and where they have a delightful time and enjoy it far more than 

wandering about with their parents. They need practically not come 

home at all in the summer holidays."  

 

"But PhillipaHaymes didn't take kindly to that idea?"  

 

"She's as obstinate as a mule, that girl. Just the time of year when I 

want the tennis court mowed and marked nearly every day. Old Ashe 

gets the lines crooked. But my convenience is never considered!"  

 

"I presume PhillipaHaymes takes a smaller salary than is usual."  

 

"Naturally. What else could she expect?"  

 

"Nothing, I'm sure," said Craddock. "Good morning, Mrs. Lucas."  

 

III 

 

"It was dreadful," said Mrs. Swettenham happily. 

 

"Quite - quite - dreadful, and what I say is that they ought to be far more 

careful what advertisements they accept at the Gazette office. At the 

time, when I read it, I thought it was very odd. I said so, didn't I, 

Edmund?"  

 

"Do you remember just what you were doing when the lights went out, 

Mrs. Swettenham?" asked the Inspector. 

 



"How that reminds me of my old Nannie! Where was Moses when the 

light went out? The answer, of course, was 'In the Dark.' Just like us 

yesterday evening. All standing about and wondering what was going 

to happen. And then, you know, the thrill when it suddenly went pitch 

black. And the door opening - just a dim figure standing there with a 

revolver and that blinding light and a menacing voice saying 'Your 

money or your life!' Oh, I've never enjoyed anything so much. And then 

a minute later, of course, it was all dreadful. Real bullets, just whistling 

past our cars! It must have been just like the Commandos in the war."  

 

"Whereabouts were you standing or sitting at the time, Mrs. 

Swettenham?"  

 

"Now let me see, where was I? Who was I talking to, Edmund?"  

 

"I really haven't the least idea, Mother."  

 

"Was it Miss Hinchliffe I was asking about giving the hens cod liver oil in 

the cold weather? Or was it Mrs. Harmon - no, she'd only just arrived. I 

think I was just saying to Colonel Easterbrook that I thought it was 

really very dangerous to have an atom research station in England. It 

ought to be on some lonely island in case the radio-activity gets loose."  

 

"You don't remember if you were sitting or standing?"  

 

"Does it really matter, Inspector? I was somewhere over by the window 

or near the mantelpiece, because I know I was quite near the clock 

when it struck. Such a thrilling moment! Waiting to see if anything might 

be going to happen."  



 

"You describe the light from the torch as blinding. Was it turned full on 

to you?"  

 

"It was right in my eyes. I couldn't see a thing."  

 

"Did the man hold it still, or did he move it about, from person to 

person?"  

 

"Oh, I don't really know. Which did he do, Edmund?"  

 

"It moved rather slowly over us all, so as to see what we were all doing, 

I suppose, in case we should try and rush him."  

 

"And where exactly in the room were you, Mr. Swettenham?"  

 

"I'd been talking to Julia Simmons. We were both standing up in the 

middle of the room - the long room."  

 

"Was everyone in that room, or was there anyone in the far room?"  

 

" PhillipaHaymes had moved in there, I think. She was over by that far 

mantelpiece. I think she was looking for something."  

 

"Have you any idea as to whether the third shot was suicide or an 

accident?" 

 

"I've no idea at all. The man seemed to swerve round very suddenly and 

then crumple up and fall - but it was all very confused. You must realise 



that you couldn't really see anything. And then that refugee girl started 

yelling the place down."  

 

"I understand it was you who unlocked the dining-room door and let her 

out?"  

 

"Yes."  

 

"The door was definitely locked on the outside?"  

 

Edmund looked at him curiously. "Certainly it was. Why, you don't 

imagine -" 

 

"I just like to get my facts quite clear. Thank you, Mr. Swettenham."  

 

IV 

 

Inspector Craddock was forced to spend quite a long time with Colonel 

and Mrs. Easterbrook. He had to listen to a long disquisition on the 

psychological aspect of the case. 

 

"The psychological approach - that's the only thing nowadays," the 

Colonel told him. "You've got to understand your criminal. Now the 

whole set-up here is quite plain to a man who's had the wide experience 

that I have. Why does this fellow put that advert in? Psychology. He 

wants to advertise himself - to focus attention on himself. He's been 

passed over, perhaps despised as a foreigner by the other employees 

at the Spa Hotel. A girl has turned him down, perhaps. He wants to rivet 

her attention on him. Who is the idol of the cinema nowadays - the 



gangster - the tough guy? Very well, he will be a tough guy. Robbery 

with violence. A mask? A revolver? But he wants an audience - he must 

have an audience. So he arranges for an audience. And then, at the 

supreme moment, his part runs away with him - he's more than a 

burglar. He's a killer. He shoots - blindly -" 

 

Inspector Craddock caught gladly at a word: "You say 'blindly,' Colonel 

Easterbrook. You didn't think that he was firing deliberately at one 

particular object - at Miss Blacklog, that is to say?"  

 

"No, no. He just loosed off, as I say, blindly. And that's what brought him 

to himself. The bullet hit someone - actually it was only a graze, but he 

didn't know that. He comes to himself with a bang. All this - this make-

believe he's been indulging in - is real. He's shot at someone - perhaps 

killed someone... It's all up with him. And so in blind panic he turns the 

revolver on himself."  

 

Colonel Easterbrook paused, cleared his throat appreciatively and said 

in a satisfied voice, "Plain as a pikestaff, that's what it is, plain as a 

pikestaff."  

 

"It really is wonderful," said Mrs. Easterbrook, "the way you know 

exactly what happened, Archie."  

 

Her voice was warm with admiration. 

 

Inspector Craddock thought it was wonderful, too, but he was not quite 

so warmly appreciative. 

 



"Exactly where were you in the room, Colonel Easterbrook, when the 

actual shooting business took place?"  

 

"I was standing with my wife - near a centre table with some flowers on 

it."  

 

"I caught hold of your arm, didn't I, Archie, when it happened? I was 

simply scared to death. I just had to hold on to you."  

 

"Poor little kitten," said the Colonel playfully. 

 

V 

 

The Inspector ran Miss Hinchliffe to earth by a pigsty. 

 

"Nice creatures, pigs," said Miss Hinchliffe, scratching a wrinkled pink 

back. "Coming on well, isn't he? Good bacon round about Christmas 

time. Well, what do you want to see me about? I told your people last 

night I hadn't the least idea who the man was. Never seen him 

anywhere in the neighbourhood snooping about or anything of that sort. 

Our Mrs. Mopp says he came from one of the big hotels in Medenham 

Wells. Why didn't he hold up someone there if he wanted to? Get a 

much better haul."  

 

That was undeniable - Craddock proceeded with his inquiries. 

 

"Where were you exactly when the incident took place?"  

 



"Incident! Reminds me of my A.R.P. days. Saw some incidents then, I 

can tell you. Where was I when the shooting started? That what you 

want to know?"  

 

"Yes."  

 

"Leaning up against the mantelpiece hoping to God someone would 

offer me a drink soon," replied Miss Hinchliffe promptly. 

 

"Do you think that the shots were fired blindly, or aimed carefully at one 

particular person?"  

 

"You mean aimed at Blacklog? How the devil should I know? 

Damned hard to sort out what your impressions really were or what 

really happened after it's all over. All I know is the lights went out, and 

that torch went whirling round dazzling us all, and then the shots were 

fired and I thought to myself, 'If that damned young fool Patrick 

Simmons is playing his jokes with a loaded revolver somebody will get 

hurt.'" 

 

"You thought it was Patrick Simmons?"  

 

"Well, it seemed likely. Edmund Swettenham is intellectual and writes 

books and doesn't care for horseplay, and old Colonel Easterbrook 

wouldn't think that sort of thing funny. But Patrick's a wild boy. 

However, I apologise to him for the idea."  

 

"Did your friend think it might be Patrick Simmons?"  

 



"Murgatroyd? You'd better talk to her yourself. Not that you'll get any 

sense out of her. She's down the orchard. I'll yell for her if you like."  

 

Miss Hinchliffe raised her stentorian voice in a powerful bellow: 

 

"Hi - you, Murgatroyd..."  

 

"Coming..." floated back a thin cry. 

 

"Hurry up - Polieece," bellowed Miss Hinchliffe. 

 

Miss Murgatroyd arrived at a brisk trot very much out of breath. Her 

skirt was down at the hem and her hair was escaping from an 

inadequate hair net. Her round, good-natured face beamed. 

 

"Is it Scotland Yard?" she asked breathlessly. "I'd no idea. Or I wouldn't 

have left the house."  

 

"We haven't called in Scotland Yard yet, Miss Murgatroyd. I'm Inspector 

Craddock from Milchester."  

 

"Well, that's very nice, I'm sure," said Miss Murgatroyd vaguely. "Have 

you found any clues?"  

 

"Where were you at the time of the crime, that's what he wants to know, 

Murgatroyd?" said Miss Hinchliffe. 

 

She winked at Craddock. 

 



"Oh, dear," gasped Miss Murgatroyd. "Of course. I ought to have been 

prepared. Alibis, of course. Now, let me see, I was just with everybody 

else."  

 

"You weren't with me," said Miss Hinchliffe. 

 

"Oh, dear, Hinch, wasn't I? No, of course, I'd been admiring the 

chrysanthemums. Very poor specimens, really. And then it all 

happened - only I didn't really know it had happened - I mean I didn't 

know that anything like that had happened. I didn't imagine for a 

moment that it was a real revolver - and all so awkward in the dark, and 

that dreadful screaming. I got it all wrong, you know. I thought she was 

being murdered - I mean the refugee girl. I thought she was having her 

throat cut across the hall somewhere. I didn't know it was him - I mean, 

I didn't even know there was a man. It was really just a voice, you know, 

saying, 'Put them up, please.'" 

 

"'Stick 'em up!'" Miss Hinchliffe corrected. "And no suggestion of 

'please' about it."  

 

"It's so terrible to think that until that girl started screaming I was 

actually enjoying myself. Only being in the dark was very awkward and I 

got a knock on my corn. Agony, it was. Is there anything more you want 

to know, Inspector?"  

 

"No," said Inspector Craddock, eyeing Miss Murgatroyd speculatively. 

"I don't really think there is."  

 

Her friend gave a short bark of laughter. 



 

"He's got you taped, Murgatroyd."  

 

"I'm sure, Hinch," said Miss Murgatroyd, "that I'm only too willing to say 

anything I can."  

 

"He doesn't want that," said Miss Hinchliffe. 

 

She looked at the Inspector. "If you're doing this geographically I 

suppose you'll go to the Vicarage next. You might get something there. 

Mrs. Harmon looks as vague as they make them - but I sometimes think 

she's got brains. Anyway, she's got something."  

 

As they watched the Inspector and Sergeant Fletcher stalk away, Amy 

Murgatroyd said breathlessly: 

 

"Oh, Hinch, was I very awful? I do get so flustered!"  

 

"Not at all." Miss Hinchliffe smiled. "On the whole, I should say you did 

very well."  

 

VI 

 

Inspector Craddock looked round the big shabby room with a sense of 

pleasure. It reminded him a little of his own Cumberland home. Faded 

chintz, big shabby chairs, flowers and books strewn about, and a 

spaniel in a basket. Mrs. Harmon, too, with her distraught air, and her 

general disarray and her eager face he found sympathetic. 

 



But she said at once, frankly, "I shan't be any help to you. Because I 

shut my eyes. I hate being dazzled. And then there were shots and I 

screwed them up tighter than ever. And I did wish, oh, I did wish, that it 

had been a quiet murder. I don't like bangs."  

 

"So you didn't see anything." The Inspector smiled at her. "But you 

heard?"  

 

"Oh, my goodness yes, there was plenty to hear. Doors opening and 

shutting, and people saying silly things and gasping and old Mitzi 

screaming like a steam engine - and poor Bunny squealing like a 

trapped rabbit. And everyone pushing and falling over everyone else. 

However, when there really didn't seem to be any more bangs coming, I 

opened my eyes. Everyone was out in the hall then, with candles. And 

then the lights came on and suddenly it was all as usual - I don't mean 

really as usual, but we were ourselves again, not just - people in the 

dark. People in the dark are quite different, aren't they?"  

 

"I think I know what you mean, Mrs. Harmon."  

 

Mrs. Harmon smiled at him. 

 

"And there he was," she said. "A rather weaselly-looking foreigner - all 

pink and surprised looking - lying there dead - with a revolver beside 

him. It didn't - oh, it didn't seem to make sense, somehow."  

 

It did not make sense to the Inspector, either... The whole business 

worried him. 

 



Chapter 8 ENTER MISS MARPLE 

 

Craddock laid the typed transcript of the various interviews before the 

Chief Constable. The latter had just finished reading the wire received 

from the Swiss Police. 

 

"So he had a police record all right," said Rydesdale. "H'm - very much 

as one thought."  

 

"Yes, sir."  

 

"Jewellery... h'm, yes... falsified entries... yes... cheque... Definitely a 

dishonest fellow."  

 

"Yes, sir - in a small way."  

 

"Quite so. And small things lead to large things."  

 

"I wonder, sir."  

 

The Chief Constable looked up. 

 

"Worried, Craddock?"  

 

"Yes, sir."  

 

"Why? It's a straightforward story. Or isn't it? Let's see what all these 

people you've been talking to have to say."  

 



He drew the report towards him and read it through rapidly. 

 

"The usual thing - plenty of inconsistencies and contradictions. 

Different people's accounts of a few moments of stress never agree. 

But the main picture seems clear enough."  

 

"I know, sir - but it's an unsatisfactory picture. If you know what I mean - 

it's the wrong picture."  

 

"Well, let's take the facts. Rudi Scherz took the 5:20 bus from 

Medenham to Chipping Cleghorn arriving there at six o'clock. Evidence 

of conductor and two passengers. From the bus stop he walked away in 

the direction of Little Paddocks. He got into the house with no 

particular difficulty - probably through the front door. He held up the 

company with a revolver, he fired two shots, one of which slightly 

wounded Miss Blacklog, he then killed himself with a third shot, 

whether accidentally or deliberately there is not sufficient evidence to 

show. The reasons why he did all this are profoundly unsatisfactory, I 

agree. But why isn't really a question we are called upon to answer. A 

Coroner's jury may bring it in suicide - or accidental death. Whichever 

verdict it is, it's the same as far as we're concerned. We can write 

finis."  

 

"You mean we can always fall back upon Colonel Easterbrook's 

psychology," said Craddock gloomily. 

 

Rydesdale smiled. 

 



"After all, the Colonel's probably had a good deal of experience," he 

said. "I'm pretty sick of the psychological jargon that's used so glibly 

about everything nowadays - but we can't really rule it out." 

 

"I still feel the picture's all wrong, sir."  

 

"Any reason to believe that somebody in the set-up at Chipping 

Cleghorn is lying to you?"  

 

Craddock hesitated. 

 

"I think the foreign girl knows more than she lets on. But that may be 

just prejudice on my part."  

 

"You think she might possibly have been in it with this fellow? Let him 

into the house? Put him up to it?"  

 

"Something of the kind. I wouldn't put it past her. But that surely 

indicates that there really was something valuable, money or jewellery, 

in the house, and that doesn't seem to have been the case. Miss 

Blacklog negatived it quite decidedly. So did the others. That leaves us 

with the proposition that there was something valuable in the house 

that nobody knew about -" 

 

"Quite a best seller plot."  

 

"I agree it's ridiculous, sir. The only other point is Miss Bunner's 

certainty that it was a definite attempt by Scherz to murder Miss 

Blacklog."  



 

"Well, from what you say - and from her statement, this Miss Bunner -" 

 

"Oh, I agree, sir," Craddock put in quickly, "she's an utterly unreliable 

witness. Highly suggestible. Anyone could put a thing into her head - 

but the interesting thing is that this is quite her own theory - no one has 

suggested it to her. Everybody else negatives it. For once she's not 

swimming with the tide. It definitely is her own impression."  

 

"And why should Rudi Scherz want to kill Miss Blacklog?"  

 

"There you are, sir. I don't know. Miss Blacklog doesn't know - unless 

she's a much better liar than I think she is. Nobody knows. So 

presumably it isn't true."  

 

He sighed. 

 

"Cheer up, Craddock," said the Chief Constable. "I'm taking you off to 

lunch with Sir Henry and myself. The best that the Royal Spa Hotel in 

Medenham Wells can provide."  

 

"Thank you, sir." Craddock looked slightly surprised. 

 

"You see, we received a letter -" He broke off as Sir Henry Clithering 

entered the room. "Ah, there you are, Henry."  

 

Sir Henry, informal this time, said, "'Morning, Dermot."  

 

"I've got something for you. Henry," said the Chief Constable."  



 

"What's that?"  

 

"Authentic letter from an old Pussy. Staying at the Royal Spa Hotel. 

Something she thinks we might like to know in connection with this 

Chipping Cleghorn business."  

 

"The old Pussies," said Sir Henry triumphantly. 

 

"What did I tell you? They hear everything. They see everything. And, 

unlike the famous adage, they speak all evil. What's this particular one 

got hold of?"  

 

Rydesdale consulted the letter. 

 

"Writes just like my old grandmother," he complained. "Spiky. Like a 

spider in the ink bottle, and all underlined. A good deal about how she 

hopes it won't be taking up our valuable time, but might possibly be of 

some slight assistance, etc., etc. What's her name? Marple - something - 

Murple - no, Marple,  Marple."  

 

"Ye Gods and Little Fishes," said Sir Henry, "can it be? George, it's my 

own particular, one and only, four starred Pussy. The super Pussy of all 

old Pussies. And she has managed somehow to be at Medenham Wells, 

instead of peacefully at home in St. Mary Mead, just at the right time to 

be mixed up in a murder. Once more a murder is announced - for the 

benefit and enjoyment of Miss Marple."  

 



"Well, Henry," said Rydesdale sardonically. "I'll be glad to see your 

paragon. Come on! We'll lunch at the Royal Spa and we'll interview the 

lady. Craddock, here, is looking highly sceptical."  

 

"Not at all, sir," said Craddock politely. 

 

He thought to himself that sometimes his godfather carried things a bit 

far. 

 

II 

 

Miss  Marple was very nearly, if not quite, as Craddock had 

pictured her. She was far more benignant than he had imagined and a 

good deal older. She seemed indeed very old. She had snow white hair 

and a pink crinkled face and very soft innocent blue eyes, and she was 

heavily enmeshed in fleecy wool. Wool round her shoulders in the form 

of a lacy cape and wool that she was knitting and which turned out to 

be a baby's shawl. 

 

She was all incoherent delight and pleasure at seeing Sir Henry, and 

became quite flustered when introduced to the Chief Constable and 

Detective-Inspector Craddock. 

 

"But really, Sir Henry, how fortunate... how very fortunate. So long 

since I have seen you... Yes, my rheumatism. Very bad of late. Of 

course I couldn't have afforded this hotel (really fantastic what they 

charge nowadays) but Raymond - my nephew, Raymond West, you may 

remember him?"  

 



"Everyone knows his name."  

 

"Yes, the dear boy has been so successful with his clever books - he 

prides himself upon never writing about anything pleasant. The dear 

boy insisted on paying all my expenses. And his dear wife is making a 

name for herself too, as an artist. Mostly jugs of dying flowers and 

broken combs on window-sills. I never dare tell her, but I still admire 

Blair Leighton and Alma Tadema. Oh, but I'm chattering. And the Chief 

Constable himself - indeed I never expected - so afraid I shall be taking 

up his time -" 

 

"Completely ga-ga," thought the disgusted Detective-Inspector 

Craddock. 

 

"Come into the Manager's private room," said Rydesdale. "We can talk 

better there."  

 

When Miss Marple had been disentangled from her wool, and her spare 

knitting pins collected, she accompanied them, fluttering and 

protesting, to Mr. Rowlandson's comfortable sitting-room. 

 

"Now, Miss Marple, let's hear what you have to tell us," said the Chief 

Constable. 

 

Miss Marple came to the point with unexpected brevity. 

 

"It was a cheque," she said. "He altered it."  

 

"He?"  



 

"The young man at the desk here, the one who is supposed to have 

staged that hold-up and shot himself."  

 

"He altered a cheque, you say?"  

 

Miss Marple nodded. 

 

"Yes. I have it here." She extracted it from her bag and laid it on the 

table. "It came this morning with my others from the Bank. You can see 

it was for seven pounds, and he altered it to seventeen. A stroke in front 

of the 7, and teen added after the word seven with a nice artistic little 

blot just blurring the whole word. Really very nicely done. A certain 

amount of practice, I should say. It's the same ink, because I wrote the 

cheque actually at the desk. I should think he'd done it quite often 

before, wouldn't you?"  

 

"He picked the wrong person this time," remarked Sir Henry. 

 

Miss Marple nodded agreement. 

 

"Yes. I'm afraid he would never have gone very far in crime. I was quite 

the wrong person. Some busy young married woman, or some girl 

having a love affair - that's the kind who write cheques for all sorts of 

different sums and don't really look through their passbooks carefully. 

But an old woman who has to be careful of the pennies, and who has 

formed habits - that's quite the wrong person to choose. Seventeen 

pounds is a sum I never write a cheque for. Twenty pounds, a round 

sum, for the monthly wages and books. And as for my personal 



expenditure, I usually cash seven - it used to be five, but everything has 

gone up so."  

 

"And perhaps he reminded you of someone?" prompted Sir Henry, 

mischief in his eye. 

 

Miss Marple smiled and shook her head at him. 

 

"You are very naughty, Sir Henry. As a matter of fact he did. Fred Tyier, 

at the fish shop. Always slipped an extra 1 in the shillings column. 

Eating so much fish as we do nowadays, it made a long bill, and lots of 

people never added it up. Just ten shillings in his pocket every time, not 

much but enough to get himself a few neckties and take Jessie Spragge 

(the girl in the draper's) to the pictures. Cut a splash, that's what these 

young fellows want to do. Well, the very first week I was here, there was 

a mistake in my bill. I pointed it out to the young man and he apologised 

very nicely and looked very much upset, but I thought to myself then: 

'You've got a shifty eye, young man.' 

 

"What I mean by a shifty eye," continued Miss Marple, "is the kind that 

looks very straight at you and never looks away or blinks."  

 

Craddock gave a sudden movement of appreciation. 

 

He thought to himself "Jim Kelly to the life" remembering a notorious 

swindler he had helped to put behind bars not long ago. 

 

"Rudi Scherz was a thoroughly unsatisfactory character," said 

Rydesdale. "He's got a police record in Switzerland, we find."  



 

"Made the place too hot for him, I suppose, and came over here with 

forged papers?" said Miss Marple. 

 

"Exactly," said Rydesdale. 

 

"He was going about with the little red-haired waitress from the dining-

room," said Miss Marple. "Fortunately I don't think her heart's affected 

at all. She just liked to have someone a bit 'different,' and he used to 

give her flowers and chocolates which the English boys don't do much. 

Has she told you all she knows?" she asked, turning suddenly to 

Craddock. "Or not quite all yet?"  

 

"I'm not absolutely sure," said Craddock cautiously. 

 

"I think there's a little to come," said Miss Marple. "She's looking very 

worried. Brought me kippers instead of herrings this morning, and 

forgot the milk jug. Usually she's an excellent waitress. Yes, she's 

worried. Afraid she might have to give evidence or something like that. 

But I expect" - her candid blue eyes swept over the manly proportions 

and handsome face of Detective-Inspector Craddock with truly 

feminine Victorian appreciation - "that you will be able to persuade her 

to tell you all she knows."  

 

Detective-Inspector Craddock blushed and Sir Henry chuckled. 

 

"It might be important," said Miss Marple. "He may have told her who it 

was."  

 



Rydesdale stared at her. 

 

"Who what was?"  

 

"I express myself so badly. Who it was who put him up to it, I mean."  

 

"So you think someone put him up to it?"  

 

Miss Marple's eyes widened in surprise. 

 

"Oh, but surely - I mean... Here's a personable young man - who niches 

a little bit here and a little bit there - alters a small cheque, perhaps 

helps himself to a small piece of jewellery if it's left lying around, or 

takes a little money from the till - all sorts of small petty thefts. Keeps 

himself going in ready money so that he can dress well, and take a girl 

about - all that sort of thing. And then suddenly he goes off, with a 

revolver, and holds up a room full of people, and shoots at someone. 

He'd never have done a thing like that - not for a moment! He wasn't that 

kind of person. It doesn't make sense."  

 

Craddock drew in his breath sharply. That was what Blacklog 

had said. What the Vicar's wife had said. What he himself felt with 

increasing force. It didn't make sense. And now Sir Henry's old Pussy 

was saying it, too, with complete certainty in her fluting old lady's voice. 

 

"Perhaps you'll tell us, Miss Marple," he said, and his voice was 

suddenly aggressive, "what did happen, then?"  

 

She turned on him in surprise. 



 

"But how should I know what happened? There was an account in the 

paper - but it says so little. One can make conjectures, of course, but 

one has no accurate information."  

 

"George," said Sir Henry. "Would it be very unorthodox if Miss Marple 

were allowed to read the notes of the interviews Craddock had with 

these people at Chipping Cleghorn."  

 

"It may be unorthodox," said Rydesdale, "but I've not got where I am by 

being orthodox. She can read them. I'd be curious to hear what she has 

to say."  

 

Miss Marple was all embarrassment. 

 

"I'm afraid you've been listening to Sir Henry. Sir Henry is always too 

kind. He thinks too much of any little observations I may have made in 

the past. Really, I have no gifts - no gifts at all - except perhaps a certain 

knowledge of human nature. People, I find, are apt to be far too trustful. 

I'm afraid that I have a tendency always to believe the worst. Not a nice 

trait. But so often justified by subsequent events."  

 

"Read these," said Rydesdale, thrusting the typewritten sheets upon 

her. "They won't take you long. After all, these people are your kind - 

you must know a lot of people like them. You may be able to spot 

something that we haven't. The case is just going to be closed. Let's 

have an amateur's opinion on it before we shut up the files. I don't mind 

telling you that Craddock here isn't satisfied. He says, like you, that it 

doesn't make sense."  



 

There was silence whilst Miss Marple read. She put the typewritten 

sheets down at last. 

 

"It's very interesting," she said with a sigh. "All the different things that 

people say - and think. The things they see - or think that they see. And 

all so complex, nearly all so trivial and if one thing isn't trivial, it's so 

hard to spot which one - like a needle in a haystack."  

 

Craddock felt a twinge of disappointment. Just for a moment or two, he 

had wondered if Sir Henry might be right about this funny old lady. She 

might have put her finger on something - old people were often very 

sharp. He'd never, for instance, been able to conceal anything from his 

own great aunt Emma. She had finally told him that his nose twitched 

when he was about to tell a lie. 

 

But just a few fluffy generalities, that was all that Sir Henry's famous 

Miss Marple could produce. He felt annoyed with her and said rather 

curtly: 

 

"The truth of the matter is that the facts are indisputable. Whatever 

conflicting details these people give, they all saw one thing. They saw a 

masked man with a revolver and a torch open the door and hold them 

up, and whether they think he said 'Stick 'em up' or 'Your money or your 

life,' or whatever phrase is associated with a hold-up in their minds, 

they saw him."  

 

"But surely," said Miss Marple gently. "They couldn't - actually - have 

seen anything at all..."  



 

Craddock caught his breath. She'd got it! She was sharp, after all. He 

was testing her by that speech of his, but she hadn't fallen for it. It didn't 

actually make any difference to the facts, or to what happened, but 

she'd realised, as he'd realised, that those people who had seen a 

masked man holding them up couldn't really have seen him at all. 

 

"If I understand rightly," Miss Marple had a pink flush on her cheeks, 

her eyes were bright and pleased as a child's, "there wasn't any light in 

the hall outside - and not on the landing upstairs either?"  

 

"That's right," said Craddock. 

 

"And so, if a man stood in the doorway and flashed a powerful torch 

into the room, nobody could see anything but the torch, could they?"  

 

"No, they couldn't. I tried it out."  

 

"And so when some of them say they saw a masked man, etc., they are 

really, though they don't realise it, recapitulating from what they saw 

afterwards - when the lights came on. So it really all fits in very well, 

doesn't it, on the assumption that Rudi Scherz was the - I think 'fall guy' 

is the expression I mean?"  

 

Rydesdale stared at her in such surprise that she grew pinker still. 

 

"I may have got the term wrong," she murmured. "I am not very clever 

about Americanisms - and I understand they change very quickly. I got 

it from one of Mr. Dashiel Hammett's stories. (I understand from my 



nephew Raymond that he is considered at the top of the tree in what is 

called the 'tough' style of literature.) A 'fall guy,' if I understand it rightly, 

means someone who will be blamed for a crime really committed by 

someone else. This Rudi Scherz seems to me exactly the right type for 

that. Rather stupid really, you know, but full of cupidity and probably 

extremely credulous."  

 

Rydesdale said, smiling tolerantly: "Are you suggesting that he was 

persuaded by someone to go out and take pot shots at a room full of 

people? Rather a tall order."  

 

"I think he was told that it was a joke," said Miss Marple. "He was paid 

for doing it, of course. Paid, that is, to put an advertisement in the 

newspaper, to go out and spy out the household premises, and then, on 

the night in question, he was to go there, assume a mask and a black 

cloak and throw open a door, brandishing a torch, and cry 'Hands up!'" 

 

"And fire off a revolver?"  

 

"No, no," said Miss Marple. "He never had a revolver."  

 

"But everyone says -" began Rydesdale, and stopped. 

 

"Exactly," said Miss Marple. "Nobody could possibly have seen a 

revolver even if he had one. And I don't think he had. I think that after 

he'd called 'Hands up' somebody came up quietly behind him in the 

darkness and fired those two shots over his shoulder. It frightened him 

to death. He swung round and as he did so, that other person shot him 

and then let the revolver drop beside him..."  



 

The three men looked at her. Sir Henry said softly: 

 

"It's a possible theory."  

 

"But who is Mr. X. who came up in the darkness?" asked the Chief 

Constable. 

 

Miss Marple coughed. 

 

"You'll have to find out from Miss Blacklog who wanted to kill her."  

 

Good for old Dora Bunner, thought Craddock. Instinct against 

intelligence every time. 

 

"So you think it was a deliberate attempt on Miss Blacklog's life," asked 

Rydesdale. 

 

"It certainly has that appearance," said Miss Marple. "Though there are 

one or two difficulties. But what I was really wondering about was 

whether there mightn't be a short cut. I've no doubt that whoever 

arranged this with Rudi Scherz took pains to tell him to keep his mouth 

shut about it, and perhaps he did keep his mouth shut, but if he talked 

to anybody it would probably be to that girl, Myrna Harris. And he may - 

he just may - have dropped some hint as to the kind of person who'd 

suggested the whole thing."  

 

"I'll see her now," said Craddock, rising. 

 



Miss Marple nodded. 

 

"Yes, do, Inspector Craddock. I'll feel happier when you have. Because 

once she's told you anything she knows she'll be much safer."  

 

"Safer?... Yes, I see."  

 

He left the room. The Chief Constable said doubtfully, but tactfully: 

"Well, Miss Marple, you've certainly given us something to think about."  

 

III 

 

"I'm sorry about it, I am really," said Myrna Harris. "It's ever so nice of 

you not to be ratty about it. But you see Mum's the sort of person who 

fusses like anything. And it did look as though I'd - what's the phrase - 

been an accessory before the fact"(the words ran glibly off her tongue). 

"I mean, I was afraid you'd never take my word for it that I only thought 

it was just a bit of fun."  

 

Inspector Craddock repeated the reassuring phrases with which he 

had broken down Myrna's resistance. 

 

"I will. I'll tell you all about it. But you will keep me out of it if you can 

because of Mum? It all started with Rudi breaking a date with me. We 

were going to the pictures that evening and then he said he wouldn't be 

able to come and I was a bit stand-offish with him about it - because 

after all, it had been his idea and I don't fancy being stood up by a 

foreigner. And he said it wasn't his fault, and I said that was a likely 

story, and then he said he'd got a bit of a lark on that night - and that he 



wasn't going to be out of pocket by it and how would I fancy a wrist-

watch? So I said, what do you mean by a lark? And he said not to tell 

anyone, but there was to be a party somewhere and he was to stage a 

sham hold-up. Then he showed me the advertisement he'd put in and I 

had to laugh. He was a bit scornful about it all. Said it was kid's stuff 

really - but that was just like the English. They never really grew up - 

and of course, I said what did he mean by talking like that about us - 

and we had a bit of an argument, but we made it up. Only you can 

understand, can't you, sir, that when I read all about it, and it hadn't 

been a joke at all and Rudi had shot someone and then shot himself - 

why, I didn't know what to do. I thought if I said I knew about it 

beforehand, it would look as though I were in on the whole thing. But it 

really did seem like a joke when he told me about it. I'd have sworn he 

meant it that way. I didn't even know he'd got a revolver. He never said 

anything about taking a revolver with him."  

 

Craddock comforted her and then asked the most important question. 

 

"Who did he say it was who had arranged this party?"  

 

But there he drew a blank. 

 

"He never said who it was that was getting him to do it. I suppose 

nobody was, really. It was all his own doing."  

 

"He didn't mention a name? Did he say he - or she?"  

 

"He didn't say anything except that it was going to be a scream. 'I shall 

laugh to see all their faces.' That's what he said."  



 

He hadn't had long to laugh, Craddock thought. 

 

IV 

 

"It's only a theory," said Rydesdale as they drove back to Medenham. 

"Nothing to support it, nothing at all. Put it down as old maid's 

vapourings and let it go, eh?"  

 

"I'd rather not do that, sir."  

 

"It's all very improbable. A mysterious X appearing suddenly in the 

darkness behind our Swiss friend. Where did he come from? Who was 

he? Where had he been?"  

 

"He could have come in through the side door," said Craddock, "just as 

Scherz came. Or," he added slowly, "he could have come from the 

kitchen."  

 

"She could have come from the kitchen, you mean?"  

 

"Yes, sir, it's a possibility. I've not been satisfied about that girl all along. 

She strikes me as a nasty bit of goods. All that screaming and hysterics 

- it could have been put on. She could have worked on this young fellow, 

let him in at the right moment, rigged the whole thing, shot him, bolted 

back into the dining-room, caught up her bit of silver and her chamois 

and started her screaming act."  

 



"Against that we have the fact that - er - what's his name - oh, yes, 

Edmund Swettenham, definitely says the key was turned on the outside 

of the door, and that he turned it to release her. Any other door into that 

part of the house?"  

 

"Yes, there's a door to the back stairs and kitchen just under the stairs, 

but it seems the handle came off three weeks ago and nobody's come 

to put it on yet. In the meantime you can't open the door. I'm bound to 

say that story seems correct. The spindle and the two handles were on 

a shelf outside the door in the hall and they were thickly coated with 

dust, but of course a professional would have ways of opening that 

door all right."  

 

"Better look up the girl's record. See if her papers are in order. But it 

seems to me the whole thing is very theoretical."  

 

Again the Chief Constable looked inquiringly at his subordinate. 

Craddock replied quietly: 

 

"I know, sir, and of course if you think the case ought to be closed, it 

must be. But I'd appreciate it if I could work on it for just a little longer."  

 

Rather to his surprise the Chief Constable said quietly and approvingly: 

 

"Good lad."  

 

"There's the revolver to work on. If this theory is correct, it wasn't 

Scherz's revolver and certainly nobody so far has been able to say that 

Scherz ever had a revolver."  



 

"It's a German make."  

 

"I know, sir. But this country's absolutely full of continental makes of 

guns. All the Americans brought them back and so did our chaps. You 

can't go by that."  

 

"True enough. Any other lines of inquiry?"  

 

"There's got to be a motive. If there's anything in this theory at all, it 

means that last Friday's business wasn't a mere joke and wasn't an 

ordinary hold-up, it was a cold-blooded attempt at murder. Somebody 

tried to murder Miss Blacklog. Now why? It seems to me that if anyone 

knows the answer to that it must be Miss Blacklog herself."  

 

"I understand she rather poured cold water on that idea?"  

 

"She poured cold water on the idea that Rudi Scherz wanted to murder 

her. And she was quite right. And there's another thing, sir."  

 

"Yes?"  

 

"Somebody might try again."  

 

"That would certainly prove the truth of the theory," said the Chief 

Constable dryly. "By the way, look after Miss Marple, won't you?"  

 

"Miss Marple? Why?"  

 



"I gather she is taking up residence at the Vicarage in Chipping 

Cleghorn and coming into Medenham Wells twice a week for her 

treatments. It seems that Mrs. What's-her-name is the daughter of an 

old friend of Miss Marple's. Good sporting instincts, that old bean. Oh, 

well, I suppose she hasn't much excitement in her life and sniffing round 

after possible murderers gives her a kick."  

 

"I wish she wasn't coming," said Craddock seriously. 

 

"Going to get under your feet?"  

 

"Not that, sir, but she's a nice old thing. I shouldn't like anything to 

happen to her... always supposing, I mean, that there's anything in this 

theory." 

 

Chapter 9 CONCERNING THE DOOR 

 

"I'm sorry to bother you again, Miss Blacklog -" 

 

"Oh, it doesn't matter. I suppose, as the inquest was adjourned for a 

week, you're hoping to get more evidence?"  

 

Detective-Inspector Craddock nodded. 

 

"To begin with, Miss Blacklog, Rudi Scherz was not the son of the 

proprietor of the Hotel des Alpes at Montreux. He seems to have started 

his career as an orderly in a hospital at Berne. A good many of the 

patients missed small pieces of jewellery. Under another name he was 

a waiter at one of the small winter sports places. His speciality there 



was making out duplicate bills in the restaurant with items on one that 

didn't appear on the other. The difference, of course, went into his 

pocket. After that he was in a department store in Zurich. Their losses 

from shop-lifting were rather above the average whilst he was with 

them. It seems likely that the shop-lifting wasn't entirely due to 

customers."  

 

"He was a picker up of unconsidered trifles, in fact?" said Miss 

Blacklog dryly. "Then I was right in thinking that I had not seen him 

before?"  

 

"You were quite right - no doubt you were pointed out to him at the 

Royal Spa Hotel and he pretended to recognise you. The Swiss police 

had begun to make his own country rather too hot for him, and he came 

over here with a very nice set of forged papers and took a job at the 

Royal Spa."  

 

"Quite a good hunting ground," said Miss Blacklog dryly. "It's extremely 

expensive and very well-off people stay there. Some of them are 

careless about their bills, I expect."  

 

"Yes," said Craddock. "There were prospects of a satisfactory 

harvest."  

 

Miss Blacklog was frowning. 

 

"I see all that," she said. "But why come to Chipping Cleghorn? What 

does he think we've got here that could possibly be better than the rich 

Royal Spa Hotel?"  



 

"You stick to your statement that there's nothing of especial value in the 

house?"  

 

"Of course there isn't. I should know. I can assure you, Inspector, we've 

not got an unrecognised Rembrandt or anything like that."  

 

"Then it looks, doesn't it, as though your friend, Miss Bunner were 

right? He came here to attack you."  

 

("There, Letty, what did I tell you!"  

 

"Oh, nonsense, Bunny.") 

 

"But is it nonsense?" said Craddock. "I think, you know, that it's true."  

 

Miss Blacklog stared very hard at him. 

 

"Now, let's get this straight. You really believe that this young man 

came out here - having previously arranged by means of an 

advertisement that half the village would turn up agog at that particular 

time -" 

 

"But he mayn't have meant that to happen," interrupted Miss Bunner 

eagerly. "It may have been just a horrid sort of warning - to you, Letty - 

that's how I read it at the time - 'A murder is announced' - I felt in my 

bones that it was sinister - if it had all gone as planned he would have 

shot you and got away - and how would anyone have ever known who it 

was?"  



 

"That's true enough," said Miss Blacklog. "But -" 

 

"I knew that advertisement wasn't a joke, Letty. I said so. And look at 

Mitzi - she was frightened, too!" 

 

"Ah," said Craddock, "Mitzi. I'd like to know rather more about that 

young woman."  

 

"Her permit and papers are quite in order."  

 

"I don't doubt that," said Craddock dryly. "Scherz's papers appeared to 

be quite correct, too."  

 

"But why should this Rudi Scherz want to murder me? That's what you 

don't attempt to explain, Inspector Craddock."  

 

"There may have been someone behind Scherz," said Craddock slowly. 

"Have you thought of that?"  

 

He used the words metaphorically though it flashed across his mind 

that if Miss Marple's theory was correct, the words would also be true in 

a literal sense. In any case they made little impression on Miss Blacklog, 

who still looked sceptical. 

 

"The point remains the same," she said. "Why on earth should anyone 

want to murder me?"  

 

"It's the answer to that that I want you to give me, Miss Blacklog." 



 

"Well, I can't! That's flat. I've no enemies. As far as I'm aware I've 

always lived on perfectly good terms with my neighbours. I don't know 

any guilty secrets about anyone. The whole idea is ridiculous! And if 

what you're hinting is that Mitzi has something to do with this, that's 

absurd, too. As Miss Bunner has just told you she was frightened to 

death when she saw that advertisement in the Gazette. She actually 

wanted to pack up and leave the house then and there."  

 

"That may have been a clever move on her part. She may have known 

you'd press her to stay."  

 

"Of course, if you've made up your mind about it, you'll find an answer 

to everything. But I can assure you that if Mitzi had taken an 

unreasoning dislike to me, she might conceivably poison my food, but 

I'm sure she wouldn't go in for all this elaborate rigmarole. 

 

"The whole idea's absurd. I believe you police have got an anti-

foreigner complex. Mitzi may be a liar but she's not a cold-blooded 

murderer. Go and bully her if you must. But when she's departed in a 

whirl of indignation, or shut herself up howling in her room, I've a good 

mind to make you cook the dinner. Mrs. Harmon is bringing some old 

lady who is staying with her to tea this afternoon and I wanted Mitzi to 

make some little cakes - but I suppose you'll upset her completely. 

Can't you possibly go and suspect somebody else?"  

 

II 

 



Craddock went out to the kitchen. He asked Mitzi questions that he had 

asked her before and received the same answers. 

 

Yes, she had locked the front door soon after four o'clock. No, she did 

not always do so, but that afternoon she had been nervous because of 

'that dreadful advertisement.' 

 

It was no good locking the side door because Miss Blacklog and Miss 

Bunner went out that way to shut up the ducks and feed the chickens 

and PhillipaHaymes usually came in that way from work. 

 

"PhillipaHaymes says she locked the door when she came in at 5:30."  

 

"Ah, and you believe her - oh, yes, you believe her..."  

 

"Do you think we shouldn't believe her?"  

 

"What does it matter what I think? You will not believe me."  

 

"Supposing you give us a chance. You think PhillipaHaymes didn't lock 

that door?"  

 

"I thinking she was very careful not to lock it."  

 

"What do you mean by that?" asked Craddock. 

 

"That young man, he does not work alone. No, he knows where to come, 

he knows that when he comes a door will be left open for him - oh, very 

conveniently open!"  



 

"What are you trying to say?"  

 

"What is the use of what I say? You will not listen. You say I am a poor 

refugee girl who tells lies. You say that a fair-haired English lady, oh, no, 

she does not tell lies - she is so British - so honest. So you believe her 

and not me. But I could tell you. Oh, yes, I could tell you!"  

 

She banged down a saucepan on the stove. 

 

Craddock was in two minds whether to take notice of what might be 

only a stream of spite. 

 

"We note everything we are told," he said. 

 

"I shall not tell you anything at all. Why should I? You are all alike. You 

persecute and despise poor refugees. If I say to you that when, a week 

before, that young man come to ask Miss Blacklog for money and she 

sends him away, as - you say, with a flea in the ear - if I tell you that after 

that I hear him talking with PhillipaHaymes - yes, out there in the 

summerhouse - all you say is that I make it up!"  

 

And so you probably are making it up, thought Craddock. 

 

But he said aloud: 

 

"You couldn't hear what was said out in the summerhouse."  

 

"There you are wrong," screamed Mitzi triumphantly. 



 

"I go out to get nettles - it makes very nice vegetables, nettles. They do 

not think so, but I cook it and not tell them. And I hear them talking in 

there. He say to her 'But where can I hide?' And she say 'I will show you' 

- and then she say, 'At a quarter-past six,' and I think, 'Ach so! That is 

how you behave, my fine lady! After you come back from work, you go 

out to meet a man. You bring him into the house.' Miss Blacklog, I think, 

she will not like that. She will turn you out. I will watch, I think, and listen 

and then I will tell Miss Blacklog. But I understand now I was wrong. It 

was not love she planned with him, it was to rob and to murder. But you 

will say I make all this up. Wicked Mitzi, you will say. I will take her to 

prison."  

 

Craddock wondered. She might be making it up. 

 

But possibly she might not. He asked cautiously: 

 

"You are sure it was this Rudi Scherz she was talking to?"  

 

"Of course I am sure. He just leave and I see him go from the drive 

across to the summerhouse. And presently," said Mitzi defiantly, "I go 

out to see if there are any nice young green nettles."  

 

Would there, the Inspector wondered, be any nice young green nettles 

in October? But he appreciated that Mitzi had had to produce a hurried 

reason for what had undoubtedly been nothing more than plain 

snooping. 

 

"You didn't hear any more than what you have told me?"  



 

Mitzi looked aggrieved. 

 

"That Miss Bunner, the one with the long nose, she call and call me. 

Mitzi! Mitzi! So I have to go. Oh, she is irritating. Always interfering. 

Says she will teach me to cook. Her cooking! It tastes, yes, everything 

she does, of water, water, water!"  

 

"Why didn't you tell me this the other day?" asked Craddock sternly. 

 

"Because I did not remember - I did not think... Only afterwards do I say 

to myself, it was planned then - planned with her."  

 

"You are quite sure it was  PhillipaHaymes?"  

 

"Oh, yes, I am sure. Oh, yes, I am very sure. She is a thief, that  

PhillipaHaymes. A thief and the associate of thieves. What she gets for working 

in the garden, it is not enough for such a fine lady, no. She has to rob 

Miss Blacklog who has been kind to her. Oh, she is bad, bad, bad, that 

one!"  

 

"Supposing," said the Inspector, watching her closely, "that someone 

was to say that you had been seen talking to Rudi Scherz?"  

 

The suggestion had less effect than he had hoped for. 

 

Mitzi merely snorted and tossed her head. 

 



"If anyone say they see me talking to him, that is lies, lies, lies, lies," she 

said contemptuously. "To tell lies about anyone, that is easy, but in 

England you have to prove them true. Miss Blacklog tell me that, and it 

is true, is it not? I do not speak with murderers and thieves. And no 

English policeman shall say I do. And how can I do cooking for lunch if 

you are here, talk, talk, talk? Go out of my kitchens, please. I want now 

to make a very careful sauce."  

 

Craddock went obediently. He was a little shaken in his suspicions of 

Mitzi. Her story about  PhillipaHaymes had been told with great 

conviction. Mitzi might be a liar (he thought she was), but he fancied 

that there might be some substratum of truth in this particular tale. He 

resolved to speak to PhillipaHaymes on the subject. She had seemed to him 

when he questioned her a quiet, well-bred young woman. He had had 

no suspicion of her. 

 

Crossing the hall, in his abstraction, he tried to open the wrong door. 

Miss Bunner, descending the staircase, hastily put him right. 

 

"Not that door," she said. "It doesn't open. The next one to the left. Very 

confusing, isn't it. So many doors."  

 

"There are a good many," said Craddock, looking up and down the 

narrow hall. 

 

Miss Bunner amiably enumerated them for him. 

 

"First the door to the cloakroom, and then the cloaks cupboard door 

and then the dining-room that's on that side. And on this side, the 



dummy door that you were trying to get through and then there's the 

drawing-room door proper, and then the china cupboard door and the 

door of the little flower room, and at the end the side door. Most 

confusing. Especially these two being so near together. I've often tried 

the wrong one by mistake. We used to have the hall table against it, as a 

matter of fact, but then we moved it along against the wall there."  

 

Craddock had noted, almost mechanically, a thin line horizontally 

across the panels of the door he had been trying to open. He realised 

now it was the mark where the table had been. Something stirred 

vaguely in his mind as he asked, "Moved? How long ago?"  

 

In questioning Dora Bunner there was fortunately no need to give a 

reason for any question. Any query on any subject seemed perfectly 

natural to the garrulous Miss Bunner who delighted in the giving of 

information, however trivial. 

 

"Now let me see, really quite recently - ten days or a fortnight ago."  

 

"Why was it moved?"  

 

"I really can't remember. Something to do with the flowers. I think 

PhillipaHaymes did a big vase - she arranges flowers quite beautifully - all 

autumn colouring and twigs and branches, and it was so big it caught 

your hair as you went past, and so PhillipaHaymes said, 'Why not move the table 

along and anyway the flowers would look much better against the bare 

wall than against the panels of the door.' Only we had to take down 

'Wellington at Waterloo.' Not a print I'm really very fond of. We put it 



under the stairs."  

"It's not really a dummy, then?" Craddock asked, looking at the door. 

 

"Oh, no, it's a real door, if that's what you mean. It's the door of the 

small drawing-room, but when the rooms were thrown into one, one 

didn't need two doors, so this one was fastened up."  

 

"Fastened up?" Craddock tried it again, gently. "You mean it's nailed 

up? Or just locked?"  

 

"Oh, locked, I think, and bolted too."  

 

He saw the bolt at the top and tried it. The bolt slid back easily - too 

easily... 

 

"When was it last open?" he asked Miss Bunner. 

 

"Oh, years and years ago, I imagine. It's never been opened since I've 

been here, I know that."  

 

"You don't know where the key is?"  

 

"There are a lot of keys in the hall drawer. It's probably among those."  

 

Craddock followed her and looked at a rusty assortment of old keys 

pushed far back in the drawer. He scanned them and selected one that 

looked different from the rest and went back to the door. The key fitted 

and turned easily. He pushed and the door slid open noiselessly. 

 



"Oh, do be careful," cried Miss Bunner. "There may be something 

resting against it inside. We never open it."  

 

"Don't you?" said the Inspector. 

 

His face now was grim. He said with emphasis: "This door's been 

opened quite recently, Miss Bunner. The lock's been oiled and the 

hinges."  

 

She stared at him, her foolish face a gape. 

 

"But who could have done that?" she asked. 

 

"That's what I mean to find out," said Craddock grimly. He thought - "X 

from outside? No - X was here - in this house - X was in the drawing-

room that night..." 

 

Chapter 10 PIP AND EMMA 

 

Miss Blacklog listened to him this time with more attention. She was an 

intelligent woman, as he had known, and she grasped the implications 

of what he had to tell her. 

 

"Yes," she said quietly. "That does alter things... No one had any right 

to meddle with that door. Nobody has meddled with it to my 

knowledge."  

 



"You see what it means," the Inspector urged. "When the lights went 

out, anybody in this room the other night could have slipped out of that 

door, come up behind Rudi Scherz and fired at you."  

 

"Without being seen or heard or noticed?"  

 

"Without being seen or heard or noticed. Remember when the lights 

went out people moved, exclaimed, bumped into each other. And after 

that all that could be seen was the blinding light of the electric torch." 

Miss Blacklog said slowly, "And you believe that one of those people - 

one of my nice commonplace neighbours - slipped out and tried to 

murder me? Me? But why? For goodness' sake, why?"  

 

"I've a feeling that you must know the answer to that question, Miss 

Blacklog."  

 

"But I don't, Inspector. I can assure you, I don't."  

 

"Well, let's make a start. Who gets your money if you were to die?"  

 

Miss Blacklog said rather reluctantly: 

 

"Patrick and Julia. I've left the furniture in this house and a small 

annuity to Bunny. Really, I've not much to leave. I had holdings in 

German and Italian securities which became worthless, and what with 

taxation, and the lower percentages that are now paid on invested 

capital, I can assure you I'm not worth murdering - I put most of my 

money into an annuity about a year ago."  

 



"Still, you have some income, Miss Blacklog, and your nephew and 

niece would come into it."  

 

"And so Patrick and Julia would plan to murder me? I simply don't 

believe it. They're not desperately hard up or anything like that."  

 

"Do you know that for a fact?"  

 

"No. I suppose I only know it from what they've told me... But I really 

refuse to suspect them. Someday I might be worth murdering, but not 

now."  

 

"What do you mean by someday you might be worth murdering, Miss 

Blacklog?" Inspector Craddock pounced on the statement. 

 

"Simply that one day - possibly quite soon - I may be a very rich 

woman." 

 

"That sounds interesting. Will you explain?"  

 

"Certainly. You may not know it, but for more than twenty years I was 

secretary to and closely associated with Randall Goedler."  

 

Craddock was interested. Randall Goedler had been a big name in the 

world of finance. His daring speculations and the rather theatrical 

publicity with which he surrounded himself had made him a personality 

not quickly forgotten. He had died, if Craddock remembered rightly, in 

1937 or 1938. 

 



"He's rather before your time, I expect," said Miss Blacklog. "But you've 

probably heard of him."  

 

"Oh, yes. He was a millionaire, wasn't he?"  

 

"Oh, several times over - though his finances fluctuated. He always 

risked most of what he made on some new coup."  

 

She spoke with a certain animation, her eyes brightened by memory. 

 

"Anyway he died a very rich man. He had no children. He left his fortune 

in trust for his wife during her lifetime and after her death to me 

absolutely."  

 

A vague memory stirred in the Inspector's mind. 

 

'Immense Fortune to come to Faithful Secretary' - something of that 

kind. 

 

"For the last twelve years or so," said Miss Blacklog with a slight 

twinkle, "I've had an excellent motive for murdering Mrs. Goedler - but 

that doesn't help you, does it?"  

 

"Did - excuse me for asking this - did Mrs. Goedler resent her husband's 

disposition of his fortune?" Miss Blacklog was now looking frankly 

amused. 

 

"You needn't be so very discreet. What you really mean is, was I Randall 

Goedler's mistress? No, I wasn't. I don't think Randall ever gave me a 



sentimental thought, and I certainly didn't give him one. He was in love 

with Belle (his wife), and remained in love with her until he died. I think 

in all probability it was gratitude on his part that prompted his making 

his will. You see, Inspector, in the very early days, when Randall was 

still on an insecure footing, he came very near to disaster. It was a 

question of just a few thousands of actual cash. It was a big coup, and a 

very exciting one; daring, as all his schemes were; but he just hadn't 

got that little bit of cash to tide him over. I came to the rescue. I had a 

little money of my own. I believed in Randall. I sold every penny I had 

out and gave it to him. It did the trick. A week later he was an 

immensely wealthy man. 

 

"After that, he treated me more or less as a junior partner. Oh! they 

were exciting days." She sighed. "I enjoyed it all thoroughly. Then my 

father died, and my only sister was left a hopeless invalid. I had to give 

it all up and go and look after her. Randall died a couple of years later. I 

had made quite a lot of money during our association and I didn't really 

expect him to leave me anything, but I was very touched, yes, and very 

proud to find that if Belle predeceased me (and she was one of those 

delicate creatures whom everyone always says won't live long) I was to 

inherit his entire fortune. I think really the poor man didn't know who to 

leave it to. Belle's a dear, and she was delighted about it. She's really a 

very sweet person. She lives up in Scotland. I haven't seen her for years 

- we just write at Christmas. You see, I went with my sister to a 

sanatorium in Switzerland just before the war. She died of consumption 

out there."  

 

She was silent for a moment or two, then said: 

 



"I only came back to England just over a year ago."  

 

"You said you might - be a rich woman very soon... How soon?"  

 

"I heard from the nurse attendant who looks after Belle Goedler that 

Belle is sinking rapidly. It may be - only a few weeks."  

 

She added sadly: 

 

"The money won't mean much to me now. I've got quite enough for my 

rather simple needs. Once I should have enjoyed playing the markets 

again - but now... Oh, well, one grows old. Still, you do see, Inspector, 

don't you, that if Patrick and Julia wanted to kill me for a financial 

reason they'd be crazy not to wait for another few weeks."  

 

"Yes, Miss Blacklog, but what happens if you should predecease Mrs. 

Goedler. Who does the money go to then?"  

 

"D'you know, I've never really thought. Pip and Emma, I suppose..."  

 

Craddock stared and Miss Blacklog smiled. 

 

"Does that sound rather crazy? I believe, if I predecease Belle, the 

money would go to the legal offspring - or whatever the term is - of 

Randall's only sister. Sonia Randall had quarrelled with his sister. She 

married a man whom he considered a crook and worse."  

 

"And was he a crook?"  

 



"Oh, definitely, I should say. But I believe a very attractive person to 

women. He was a Greek or a Roumanian or something - what was his 

name now - Stamfordis, Dmitri Stamfordis."  

 

"Randall Goedler cut his sister out of his will when she married this 

man?"  

 

"Oh, Sonia was a very wealthy woman in her own right. Randall had 

already settled packets of money on her, as far as possible in a way so 

that her husband couldn't touch it. But I believe that when the lawyers 

urged him to put in someone in case I predeceased Belle, he reluctantly 

put down Sonia's offspring, simply because he couldn't think of anyone 

else and he wasn't the sort of man to leave money to charities."  

 

"And there were children of the marriage?"  

 

"Well, there are Pip and Emma." She laughed. "I know it sounds 

ridiculous. All I know is that Sonia wrote once to Belle after her 

marriage, telling her to tell Randall that she was extremely happy and 

that she had just had twins and was calling them Pip and Emma. As far 

as I know she never wrote again. But Belle, of course, may be able to 

tell you more."  

 

Miss Blacklog had been amused by her own recital. 

 

The Inspector did not look amused. 

 

"It comes to this," he said. "If you had been killed the other night, there 

are presumably at least two people in the world who would have come 



into a very large fortune. You are wrong, Miss Blacklog, when you say 

that there is no one who has a motive for desiring your death. There are 

two people, at least, who are vitally interested. How old would this 

brother and sister be?"  

 

Miss Blacklog frowned. 

 

"Let me see... 1922... no - it's difficult to remember.... I suppose about 

twenty-five or twenty-six."  

 

Her face had sobered. "But you surely don't think -" 

 

"I think somebody shot at you with the intent to kill you. I think it 

possible that that same person or persons might try again. I would like 

you, if you will, to be very very careful, Miss Blacklog. One murder has 

been arranged and did not come off. I think it possible that another 

murder may be arranged very soon."  

 

II 

 

 PhillipaHaymes straightened her back and pushed back a tendril of 

hair from her damp forehead. She was cleaning a flower border. 

 

"Yes, Inspector?"  

 

She looked at him inquiringly. In return he gave her a rather closer 

scrutiny than he had done before. Yes, a good-looking girl, a very 

English type with her pale ashblonde hair and her rather long face. An 

obstinate chin and mouth. Something of repression - of tautness about 



her. The eyes were blue, very steady in their glance, and told you 

nothing at all. The sort of girl, he thought, who would keep a secret well. 

 

"I'm sorry always to bother you when you're at work,  PhillipaHaymes," he 

said, "but I didn't want to wait until you came back for lunch. Besides, I 

thought it might be easier to talk to you here, away from Little 

Paddocks." 

 

"Yes, Inspector?"  

 

No emotion and little interest in the voice. But was there a note of 

wariness - or did he imagine it? 

 

"A certain statement has been made to me this morning. This statement 

concerns you."  

 

PhillipaHaymes raised her eyebrows very slightly. 

 

"You told me, PhillipaHaymes, that this man, Rudi Scherz, was quite 

unknown to you?"  

 

"Yes."  

 

"That when you saw him there, dead, it was the first time you had set 

eyes on him. Is that so?"  

 

"Certainly. I had never seen him before."  

 



"You did not, for instance, have a conversation with him in the 

summerhouse of Little Paddocks?"  

 

"In the summerhouse?"  

 

He was almost sure he caught a note of fear in her voice. 

 

"Yes, PhillipaHaymes."  

 

"Who says so?"  

 

"I am told that you had a conversation with this man, Rudi Scherz, and 

that he asked you where he could hide and you replied that you would 

show him, and that a time, a quarter-past six, was definitely mentioned. 

It would be a quarter-past six, roughly, when Scherz would get here 

from the bus stop on the evening of the holdup."  

 

There was a moment's silence. Then PhillipaHaymes gave a short scornful 

laugh. She looked amused. 

 

"I don't know who told you that," she said. "At least I can guess. It's a 

very silly, clumsy story - spiteful, of course. For some reason Mitzi 

dislikes me even more than she dislikes the rest of us."  

 

"You deny it?"  

 

"Of course it's not true... I never met or saw Rudi Scherz in my life, and I 

was nowhere near the house that morning. I was over here, working." 

 



Inspector Craddock said very gently: 

 

"Which morning?"  

 

There was a momentary pause. Her eyelids flickered. 

 

"Every morning. I'm here every morning. I don't get away until one 

o'clock."  

 

She added scornfully: 

 

"It's no good listening to what Mitzi tells you. She tells lies all the time."  

 

"And that's that," said Craddock when he was walking away with 

Sergeant Fletcher. "Two young women whose stories flatly contradict 

each other. Which one am I to believe?"  

 

"Everyone seems to agree that this foreign girl tells whoppers," said 

Fletcher. "It's been my experience in dealing with aliens that lying 

comes more easy than truth telling. Seems to be clear she's got a spite 

against this PhillipaHaymes."  

 

"So, if you were me, you'd believe PhillipaHaymes?"  

 

"Unless you've got reason to think otherwise, sir." And Craddock hadn't, 

not really - only the remembrance of a pair of over-steady blue eyes and 

the glib enunciation of the words that morning. For to the best of his 

recollection he hadn't said whether the interview in the summerhouse 

had taken place in the morning or the afternoon. 



 

Still, Miss Blacklog, or if not Miss Blacklog, certainly Miss Bunner, might 

have mentioned the visit of the young foreigner who had come to cadge 

his fare back to Switzerland. And  PhillipaHaymes might have therefore 

assumed that the conversation was supposed to have taken place on 

that particular morning. 

 

But Craddock still thought that there had been a note of fear in her 

voice as she asked: 'In the summerhouse?' 

 

He decided to keep an open mind on the subject. 

 

III 

 

It was very pleasant in the Vicarage garden. One of those sudden spells 

of autumn warmth had descended upon England. Inspector Craddock 

could never remember if it was St. Martin's or St. Luke's Summer, but 

he knew that it was very pleasant - and also very enervating. 

 

He sat in a deck chair provided for him by an energetic Bunch, just on 

her way to a Mothers' Meeting, and, well protected with shawls and a 

large rug round her knees, Miss Marple sat knitting beside him. The 

sunshine, the peace, the steady click of Miss Marple's knitting needles, 

all combined to produce a soporific feeling in the Inspector. And yet, at 

the same time, there was a nightmarish feeling at the back of his mind. 

 

It was like a familiar dream where an undertone of menace grows and 

finally turns Ease into Terror... 

 



He said abruptly, "You oughtn't to be here."  

 

Miss Marple's needles stopped clicking for a moment. Her placid china 

blue eyes regarded him thoughtfully. 

 

She said, "I know what you mean. You're a very conscientious boy. But 

it's perfectly all right. Bunch's father (he was vicar of our parish, a very 

fine scholar) and her mother (who is a most remarkable woman - real 

spiritual power) are very old friends of mine. It's the most natural thing 

in the world that when I'm at Medenham I should come on here to stay 

with Bunch for a little."  

 

"Oh, perhaps," said Craddock. "But - but don't snoop around... I've a 

feeling - I have really - that it isn't safe."  

 

Miss Marple smiled a little.  

 

"But I'm afraid," she said, "that we old women always do snoop. It 

would be very odd and much more noticeable if I didn't. Questions 

about mutual friends in different parts of the world and whether they 

remember so and so, and do they remember who it was that Lady 

Somebody's daughter married? All that helps, doesn't it?"  

 

"Helps?" said the Inspector, rather stupidly. 

 

"Helps to find out if people are who they say they are," said Miss Marple. 

 

She went on: "Because that's what's worrying you, isn't it? And that's 

really the particular way the world has changed since the war. Take 



this place, Chipping Cleghorn, for instance. It's very much like St. Mary 

Mead where I live. Fifteen years ago one knew who everybody was. The 

Bantrys in the big house - and the Hartnells and the Price Ridleys and 

the Weatherbys... They were people whose fathers and mothers and 

grandfathers and grandmothers, or whose aunts and uncles, had lived 

there before them. If somebody new came to live there, they brought 

letters of introduction, or they'd been in the same regiment or served 

on the same ship as someone there already. If anybody new - really new 

- really a stranger - came, well, they stuck out - everybody wondered 

about them and didn't rest till they found out."  

 

She nodded her head gently: 

 

"But it's not like that any more. Every village and small country place is 

full of people who've just come and settled there without any ties to 

bring them. The big houses have been sold, and the cottages have been 

converted and changed. And people just come - and all you know about 

them is what they say of themselves. They've come, you see, from all 

over the world. People from India and Hong Kong and China, and 

people who lived in France and Italy, in cheap places and quaint islands. 

And also those who made some money and could retire. But no one 

knows any longer who's who. Somebody can own Benares Bronze 

objects and speak of 'tiffin' and 'chota Hazri' - or own statues from 

Taormina and speak of their english church there - as Miss Murgatroyd 

and Miss Hinchcliffe. He may come from the Orient or the South of 

France. And everybody accepts the newcomers without hesitation. 

They don't expect, for the first visit, to first receive a letter from a friend, 

saying that so-and-so is a charming person, a childhood friend, etc..." 

 



And that, thought Craddock, was exactly the source of his trouble. He 

didn't know. They were all just faces and personalities vouched for by 

rationing and I.D. cards... well - printed but without photographies or 

fingerprints. You could get an I.D. for the asking - and partly due to this 

the subtle ties that hold the structure of the rural society together were 

loosening. In a city nobody knows their neighbours; neither in the 

country, but sometimes you have the illusion that you do. 

 

Thanks to the tampered door, Craddock knew that one of the 

occupants of the living-room of Little Paddocks wasn't the good 

neighbour he or she pretended to be... 

 

And so he was afraid of what could happen to Miss Marple, who was so 

frail and old, even if she was so clever... 

 

"Up to a point," he said, "we can check the past lives of these people..." 

But he knew that this what harder than it seemed. India, China, Hong-

Kong, South of France... much harder than it would have been fifteen 

years ago. He knew well that many people went around with borrowed 

identities... mostly borrowed from people who died in tragic 

circumstances in the big cities. There were organizations who bought 

or faked I.D. cards - there were hundreds of kinds of small illegal 

activities around. It was possible to check - but it would take a lot of 

time, time he didn't have since the widow of Randall Goedler was dying 

soon. 

 

It was then, tired and worried, bathed in sunlight, that he told Miss 

Marple the story of Randall Goedler and Pip and Emma. 

 



"Two names, nothing more," he said. "Nicknames, after all! They may 

not exist. They may be respectable citizens living somewhere in Europe. 

Or one of them or both could be here in Chipping Cleghorn." 

 

About twenty-five years old... who could they be? He went on: 

 

"The nephew and niece... or cousins, or whatever... for how long didn't 

she see them, I would like to know..." 

 

"I'll try to find out," said Miss Marple quietly. 

 

"For God's sake, don't, Miss Marple..." 

 

"It's going to be easy, Inspector, don't you worry. And nobody will pay 

attention, since it won't be official. If there's something wrong it's better 

not to alarm them, isn't it?" 

 

Pip and Emma, thought Craddock. Pip and Emma? It had become an 

obsession to him. The good-looking smart boy, the beautiful girl with 

cold eyes... 

 

"I may discover something about them in the next forty-eight hours," he 

said. "I'm going to Scotland. If she is able to talk, Mrs. Goedler may tell 

me something about Pip and Emma." 

 

Chapter 11 MISS MARPLE COMES TO TEA 

 

If Blacklog seemed slightly absentminded when Mrs. Harmon 

came to tea and brought a guest who was staying with her, Miss Marple, 



the guest in question, was hardly likely to notice the fact since it was 

the first time she had met her. 

 

The old lady was very charming in her gentle gossipy fashion. She 

revealed herself almost at once to be one of those old ladies who have a 

constant preoccupation with burglars. 

 

"They can get in anywhere, my dear," she assured her hostess, 

"absolutely anywhere nowadays. So many new American methods. I 

myself pin my faith to a very old-fashioned device. A cabin hook and eye. 

They can pick locks and draw back bolts but a brass hook and eye 

defeats them. Have you ever tried that?"  

 

"I'm afraid we're not very good at bolts and bars," said Miss Blacklog 

cheerfully. "There's really nothing much to burgle."  

 

"A chain on the front door," Miss Marple advised. "Then the maid need 

only open it a crack and see who is there and they can't force their way 

in."  

 

"I expect Mitzi, our Mittel European, would love that."  

 

"The hold-up you had must have been very, very frightening," said Miss 

Marple. "Bunch has been telling me all about it."  

 

"I was scared stiff," said Bunch. 

 

"It was an alarming experience," admitted Miss Blacklog. 

 



"It really seems like Providence that the man tripped himself up and 

shot himself. These burglars are so violent nowadays. How did he get 

in?"  

 

"Well, I'm afraid we don't lock our doors much."  

 

"Oh, Letty," exclaimed Miss Bunner. "I forgot to tell you the Inspector 

was most peculiar this morning. He insisted on opening the second 

door - you know - the one that's never been opened - the one over there. 

He hunted for the key and everything and said the door had been oiled. 

But I can't see why because -" 

 

Too late she got Miss Blacklog's signal to be quiet, and paused open-

mouthed. 

 

"Oh, Lotty, I'm so sorry - I mean, oh, I do beg your pardon, Letty - oh, 

dear, how stupid I am."  

 

"It doesn't matter," said Miss Blacklog, but she was annoyed. "Only I 

don't think Inspector Craddock wants that talked about. I didn't know 

you had been there when he was experimenting, Dora. You do 

understand, don't you, Mrs. Harmon?"  

 

"Oh, yes," said Bunch. "We won't breathe a word, will we, Aunt Jane. 

But I wonder why he -" 

 

She relapsed into thought. Miss Bunner fidgeted and looked miserable, 

bursting out at last: "I always say the wrong thing - Oh, dear, I'm 

nothing but a trial to you, Letty."  



 

Miss Blacklog said quickly, "You're my great comfort, Dora. And 

anyway in a small place like Chipping Cleghorn, there aren't really any 

secrets."  

 

"Now that is very true," said Miss Marple. "I'm afraid, you know, that 

things do get round in the most extraordinary way. Servants, of course, 

and yet it can't only be that, because one has so few servants 

nowadays. Still, there are the daily women and perhaps they are worse, 

because they go to everybody in turn and pass the news round."  

 

"Oh!" said Bunch Harmon suddenly. "I've got it! Of course, if that door 

could open too, someone might have gone out of here in the dark and 

done the holdup - only of course they didn't - because it was the man 

from the Royal Spa Hotel. Or wasn't it?... No, I don't see after all..." she 

frowned. 

 

"Did it all happen in this room then?" asked Miss Marple, adding 

apologetically: "I'm afraid you must think me sadly curious, Miss 

Blacklog - but it really is so very exciting - just like something one reads 

about in the paper - and actually to have happened to someone one 

knows... I'm just longing to hear all about it and to picture it all, if you 

know what I mean -" 

 

Immediately Miss Marple received a confused and voluble account from 

Bunch and Miss Bunner - with occasional emendations and corrections 

from Miss Blacklog. 

 



In the middle of it Patrick came in and good-naturedly entered into the 

spirit of the recital - going so far as to enact himself the part of Rudi 

Scherzo. 

 

"And Aunt Letty was there - in the corner by the archway... Go and 

stand there, Aunt Letty."  

 

Miss Blacklog obeyed, and then Miss Marple was shown the actual 

bullet holes. 

 

"What a marvellous - what a providential escape," she gasped. 

 

"I was just going to offer my guests cigarettes -" Miss Blacklog 

indicated the big silver box on the table. 

 

"People are so careless when they smoke," said Miss Bunner 

disapprovingly. "Nobody really respects good furniture as they used to 

do. Look at the horrid burn somebody made on this beautiful table by 

putting a cigarette down on it. Disgraceful."  

 

Miss Blacklog sighed. 

 

"Sometimes, I'm afraid, one thinks too much of one's possessions."  

 

"But it's such a lovely table, Letty."  

 

Miss Bunner loved her friend's possessions with as much fervour as 

though they had been her own. Bunch Harmon had always thought it 

was a very endearing trait in her. She showed no sign of envy. 



 

"It is a lovely table," said Miss Marple politely. "And what a very pretty 

china lamp on it."  

 

Again it was Miss Bunner who accepted the compliment as though she 

and not Miss Blacklog was the owner of the lamp. 

 

"Isn't it delightful? Dresden. There is a pair of them. The other's in the 

spare room, I think."  

 

"You know where everything in this house is, Dora - or you think you 

do," said Miss Blacklog, good-humouredly. 

 

"You care far more about my things than I do."  

 

Miss Bunner flushed. 

 

"I do like nice things," she said. Her voice was half defiant - half wistful. 

 

"I must confess," said Miss Marple, "that my own few possessions are 

very dear to me, too - so many memories, you know. It's the same with 

photographs. People nowadays have so few photographs about. Now I 

like to keep all the pictures of my nephews and nieces as babies - and 

then as children - and so on."  

 

"You've got a horrible one of me, aged three," said Bunch. "Holding a 

fox terrier and squinting."  

 



"I expect your aunt has many photographs of you," said Miss Marple, 

turning to Patrick. 

 

"Oh, we're only distant cousins," said Patrick.  

 

"I believe Elinor did send me one of you as a baby, Pat," said Miss 

Blacklog. "But I'm afraid I didn't keep it. I'd really forgotten how many 

children she'd had or what their names were until she wrote me about 

you two being over here."  

 

"Another sign of the times," said Miss Marple. 

 

"Nowadays one so often doesn't know one's younger relations at all. In 

the old days, with all the big family reunions, that would have been 

impossible."  

 

"I last saw Pat and Julia's mother at a wedding thirty years ago," said 

Miss Blacklog. "She was a very pretty girl."  

 

"That's why she has such handsome children," said Patrick with a grin. 

 

"You've got a marvellous old album," said Julia. "Do you remember, 

Aunt Letty, we looked through it the other day. The hats!"  

 

"And how smart we thought ourselves," said Miss Blacklog with a sigh. 

 

"Never mind, Aunt Letty," said Patrick, "Julia will come across a 

snapshot of herself in about thirty years' time - and won't she think she 

looks a guy!"  



 

"Did you do that on purpose?" said Bunch, as she and Miss Marple were 

walking home. "Talk about photographs I mean?"  

 

"Well, my dear, it is interesting to know that Miss Blacklog didn't know 

either of her two young relatives by sight... Yes - I think Inspector 

Craddock will be interested to hear that." 

 

Chapter 12 MORNING ACTIVITIES IN CHIPPING CLEGHORN 

 

Edmund Swettenham sat down rather precariously on a garden roller. 

 

"Good morning, PhillipaHaymes," he said. 

 

"Hallo."  

 

"Are you very busy?"  

 

"Moderately."  

 

"What are you doing?"  

 

"Can't you see?"  

 

"No. I'm not a gardener. You seem to be playing with earth in some 

fashion."  

 

"I'm pricking out winter lettuce."  

 



"Pricking out? What a curious term! Like pinking. Do you know what 

pinking is? I only learnt the other day. I always thought it was a term for 

professional duelling."  

 

"Do you want anything particular?" asked PhillipaHaymes coldly. 

 

"Yes. I want to see you."  

 

PhillipaHaymes gave him a quick glance. 

 

"I wish you wouldn't come here like this. Mrs. Lucas won't like it."  

 

"Doesn't she allow you to have followers?"  

 

"Don't be absurd."  

 

"Followers. That's another nice word. It describes my attitude perfectly. 

Respectful - at a distance - but firmly pursuing."  

 

"Please go away, Edmund. You've no business to come here."  

 

"You're wrong," said Edmund triumphantly. "I have business here. Mrs. 

Lucas rang up my mamma this morning and said she had a good many 

vegetable marrows."  

 

"Masses of them."  

 

"And would we like to exchange a pot of honey for a vegetable marrow 

or so."  



 

"That's not a fair exchange at all! Vegetable marrows are quite 

unsaleable at the moment - everybody has such a lot."  

 

"Naturally. That's why Mrs. Lucas rang up. Last time, if I remember 

rightly, the exchange suggested was some skim milk - skim milk, mark 

you - in exchange for some lettuces. It was then very early in the season 

for lettuces. They were about a shilling each."  

 

PhillipaHaymes did not speak. 

 

Edmund tugged at his pocket and extracted a pot of honey. 

 

"So here," he said, "is my alibi. Used in a loose and quite indefensible 

meaning of the term. If Mrs. Lucas pops her bust round the door of the 

potting shed, I'm here in quest of vegetable marrows. There is 

absolutely no question of dalliance."  

 

"I see."  

 

"Do you ever read Tennyson?" inquired Edmund conversationally. 

 

"Not very often."  

 

"You should. Tennyson is shortly going to make a come-back in a big 

way. When you turn on your wireless in the evening it will be the Idyls of 

the King you will hear and not interminable Trollope. I always thought 

the Trollope pose was the most unbearable affectation. Perhaps a little 



of Trollope, but not to drown in him. But speaking of Tennyson, have 

you read 'Maud'?"  

 

"Once, long ago."  

 

"It's got some points about it." He quoted softly: 

 

"'Faultily faultless, icily regular, splendidly null.' That's you, PhillipaHaymes."  

 

"Hardly a compliment!"  

 

"No, it wasn't meant to be. I gather Maud got under the poor fellow's 

skin just like you've got under mine."  

 

"Don't be absurd, Edmund."  

 

"Oh, hell, PhillipaHaymes, why are you like you are? What goes on behind your 

splendidly regular features? What do you think? What do you feel? Are 

you happy, or miserable, or frightened, or what? There must be 

something."  

 

PhillipaHaymes said quietly. 

 

"What I feel is my own business."  

 

"It's mine, too. I want to make you talk. I want to know what goes on in 

that quiet head of yours. I've a right to know. I have really. I didn't want 

to fall in love with you. I wanted to sit quietly and write my book. Such a 

nice book, all about how miserable the world is. It's frightfully easy to 



be clever about how miserable everybody is. And it's all a habit, really. 

Yes, I've suddenly become convinced of that. After reading a life of 

Burne Jones."  

 

PhillipaHaymes had stopped pricking out. She was staring at him with a puzzled 

frown. 

 

"What has Burne Jones got to do with it?"  

 

"Everything. When you've read all about the Pre-Raphaelites you 

realise just what fashion is. They were all terrifically hearty and slangy 

and jolly, and laughed and joked, and everything was fine and 

wonderful. That was fashion, too. They weren't any happier or heartier 

than we are. And we're not any more miserable than they were. It's all 

fashion, I tell you. After the last war, we went in for sex. Now it's all 

frustration. None of it matters. Why are we talking about all this? I 

started out to talk about us. Only I got cold feet and shied off. Because 

you won't help me."  

 

"What do you want me to do?"  

 

"Talk! Tell me things. Is it your husband? Do you adore him and he's 

dead and so you've shut up like a clam? Is that it? All right, you adored 

him, and he's dead. Well, other girls' husbands are dead - lots of them - 

and some of the girls loved their husbands. They tell you so in bars, and 

cry a bit when they're drunk enough, and then want to go to bed with 

you so that they'll feel better. It's one way of getting over it, I suppose. 

You've got to get over it, PhillipaHaymes. You're young - and you're extremely 



lovely - and I love you like Hell. Talk about your damned husband, tell 

me about him."  

 

"There's nothing to tell. We met and got married."  

 

"You must have been very young."  

 

"Too young."  

 

"Then you weren't happy with him? Go on, PhillipaHaymes."  

 

"There's nothing to go on about. We were married. We were as happy 

as most people are, I suppose. Harry was born. Ronald went overseas. 

He - he was killed in Italy."  

 

"And now there's Harry?"  

 

"And now there's Harry."  

 

"I like Harry. He's a really nice kid. He likes me. We get on. What about 

it, PhillipaHaymes? Shall we get married? You can go on gardening and I can go 

on writing my book and in the holidays we'll leave off working and enjoy 

ourselves. We can manage, with tact, not to have to live with Mother. 

She can fork out a bit to support her adored son. I sponge, I write tripey 

books, I have defective eyesight and I talk too much. That's the worst. 

Will you try it?"  

 



PhillipaHaymes looked at him. She saw a tall rather solemn young man with an 

anxious face and large spectacles. His sandy head was rumpled and he 

was regarding her with a reassuring friendliness. 

 

"No," said PhillipaHaymes. 

 

"Definitely no?"  

 

"Definitely no."  

 

"Why?"  

 

"You don't know anything about me."  

 

"Is that all?"  

 

"No, you don't know anything about anything."  

 

Edmund considered. 

 

"Perhaps not," he admitted. "But who does? PhillipaHaymes, my adored one -" 

He broke off. 

 

A shrill and prolonged yapping was rapidly approaching. 

 

"Pekes in the high hall garden, (said Edmund) When twilight was falling 

(only it's eleven a.m.) Phil, Phil, Phil, Phil, They were crying and calling - 

Your name doesn't lend itself to the rhythm, does it? Sounds like an 

'Ode to a Fountain Pen.' Have you got another name?"  



 

"Joan. Please go away. That's Mrs. Lucas."  

 

"Joan, Joan, Joan, Joan. Better, but still not good. When greasy Joan 

the pot doth keel - that's not a nice picture of married life, either."  

 

"Mrs. Lucas is -" 

 

"Oh, hell!" said Edmund. "Get me a blasted vegetable marrow."  

 

II 

 

Sergeant Fletcher had the house at Little Paddocks to himself. 

 

It was Mitzi's day off. She always went by the eleven o'clock bus into 

Medenham Wells. By arrangement with Miss Blacklog, Sergeant 

Fletcher had the run of the house. She and Dora Bunner had gone down 

to the village. 

 

Fletcher worked fast. Someone in the house had oiled and prepared 

that door, and whoever had done it, had done it in order to be able to 

leave the drawing-room unnoticed as soon as the lights went out. That 

ruled out Mitzi who wouldn't have needed to use the door. 

 

Who was left? The neighbours, Fletcher thought, might also be ruled 

out. He didn't see how they could have found an opportunity to oil and 

prepare the door. 

 



That left Patrick and Julia Simmons,  PhillipaHaymes, and possibly Dora 

Bunner. The young Simmons were in Milchester.  PhillipaHaymes was 

at work. Sergeant Fletcher was free to search out any secrets he could. 

But the house was disappointingly innocent. Fletcher, who was an 

expert on electricity could find nothing suggestive in the wiring or 

appurtenances of the electric fixtures to show how the lights had been 

fused. Making a rapid survey of the household bedrooms he found an 

irritating normality. In  PhillipaHaymes' room were photographs of a 

small boy with serious eyes, an earlier photo of the same child, a pile of 

schoolboy letters, a theatre programme or two. In Julia's room there 

was a drawer full of snapshots of the South of France. Bathing photos, 

a villa set amidst mimosa. Patrick's held some souvenirs of Naval days. 

Dora Bunner's held few personal possessions and they seemed 

innocent enough. 

 

And yet, thought Fletcher, someone in the house must have oiled that 

door. 

 

His thoughts broke off at a sound below stairs. 

 

He went quickly to the top of the staircase and looked down. 

 

Mrs. Swettenham was crossing the hall. She had a basket on her arm. 

She looked into the drawing-room, crossed the hall and went into the 

dining-room. She came out again without the basket. 

 

Some faint sound that Fletcher made, a board that creaked 

unexpectedly under his feet, made her turn her head. She called up: 

 



"Is that you, Miss Blacklog?"  

 

"No, Mrs. Swettenham, it's me," said Fletcher. 

 

Mrs. Swettenham gave a faint scream. 

 

"Oh! how you startled me. I thought it might be another burglar."  

 

Fletcher came down the stairs. 

 

"This house doesn't seem very well protected against burglars," he 

said. "Can anybody always walk in and out just as they like?"  

 

"I just brought up some of my quinces," explained Mrs. Swettenham. 

"Miss Blacklog wants to make quince jelly and she hasn't got a quince 

tree here. I left them in the dining-room."  

 

Then she smiled. 

 

"Oh, I see, you mean how did I get in? Well, I just came in through the 

side door. We all walk in and out of each other's houses, Sergeant. 

Nobody dreams of locking a door until it's dark. I mean it would be so 

awkward, wouldn't it, if you brought things and couldn't get in to leave 

them? It's not like the old days when you rang a bell and a servant 

always came to answer it."  

 

Mrs. Swettenham sighed. "In India, I remember," she said mournfully, 

"we had eighteen servants - eighteen. Not counting the ayah. Just as a 

matter of course. And at home, when I was a girl, we always had three 



although Mother always felt it was terribly poverty stricken not to be 

able to afford a kitchen-maid. I must say that I find life very odd 

nowadays. Sergeant, though I know one mustn't complain. So much 

worse for the miners always getting psittiscosis (or is that parrot 

disease?) and having to come out of the mines and try to be gardeners 

though they don't know weeds from spinach."  

 

She added, as she tripped towards the door, "I mustn't keep you. I 

expect you're very busy. Nothing else is going to happen, is it?"  

 

"Why should it, Mrs. Swettenham?"  

 

"I just wondered, seeing you here. I thought it might be a gang. You'll 

tell Miss Blacklog about the quinces, won't you?"  

 

Mrs. Swettenham departed. Fletcher felt like a man who has received 

an unexpected jolt. He had been assuming - erroneously, he now 

perceived - that it must have been someone in the house who had done 

the oiling of the door. He saw now that he was wrong. An outsider had 

only to wait until Mitzi had departed by bus and Blacklog and 

Dora Bunner were both out of the house. Such an opportunity must 

have been simplicity itself. That meant that he couldn't rule out anybody 

who had been in the drawing-room that night. 

 

III 

 

"Murgatroyd."  

 

"Yes, Hinch?"  



 

"I've been doing a bit of thinking?"  

 

"Have you, Hinch?"  

 

"Yes, the great brain has been working. You know, Murgatroyd, the 

whole set-up the other evening was decidedly fishy."  

 

"Fishy?"  

 

"Yes. Tuck your hair up, Murgatroyd, and take this trowel. Pretend it's a 

revolver."  

 

"Oh," said Miss Murgatroyd, nervously. 

 

"All right. It won't bite you. Now come along to the kitchen door. You're 

going to be the burglar. You stand here. Now you're going into the 

kitchen to hold up a lot of nit-wits. Take the torch. Switch it on."  

 

"But it's broad daylight!"  

 

"Use your imagination, Murgatroyd. Switch it on."  

 

Miss Murgatroyd did so, rather clumsily, shifting the trowel under one 

arm while she did so. 

 

"Now then," said Miss Hinchliffe, "off you go. Remember the time you 

played Hermia in A Midsummer Night's Dream at the Women's Institute? 



Act. Give it all you've got. 'Stick 'em up!' Those are your lines - and don't 

ruin them by saying 'Please.'" 

 

Obediently, Miss Murgatroyd raised her torch, nourished the trowel and 

advanced on the kitchen door. 

 

Transferring the torch to her right hand she swiftly turned the handle 

and stepped forward, resuming the torch in her left hand. 

 

"Stick 'em up!" she fluted, adding vexedly: "Dear me, this is very 

difficult, Hinch."  

 

"Why?"  

 

"The door. It's a swing door, it keeps coming back and I've got both 

hands full."  

 

"Exactly," boomed Miss Hinchliffe. "And the drawing-room door at Little 

Paddocks always swings to. It isn't a swing door like this, but it won't 

stay open. That's why  Blacklog bought that absolutely delectable 

heavy glass doorstop from Elliot's in the High Street. I don't mind saying 

I've never forgiven her for getting in ahead of me there. I was beating 

the old brute down from eight guineas to six pound ten, and then 

Blacklog comes along and buys the damned thing. I'd never seen as 

attractive a doorstop, you don't often get those glass bubbles in that big 

size."  

 

"Perhaps the burglar put the doorstop against the door to keep it 

open," suggested Miss Murgatroyd.  



 

"Use your common sense, Murgatroyd. What does he do? Throw the 

door open, say 'excuse me a moment,' stoop and put the stop into 

position and then resume business by saying 'Hands up?' Try holding 

the door with your shoulder."  

 

"It's still very awkward," complained Miss Murgatroyd. 

 

"Exactly," said Miss Hinchliffe. "A revolver, a torch and a door to hold 

open - a bit too much, isn't it? So what's the answer?"  

 

Miss Murgatroyd did not attempt to supply an answer. She looked 

inquiringly and admiringly at her masterful friend and waited to be 

enlightened. 

 

"We know he'd got a revolver, because he fired it," said Miss Hinchliffe. 

"And we know he had a torch because we all saw it - that is unless 

we're all the victims of mass hypnotism like explanations of the Indian 

Rope trick (what a bore that old Easterbrook is with his Indian stories) 

so the question is, did someone hold that door open for him?"  

 

"But who could have done that?"  

 

"Well, you could have for one, Murgatroyd. As far as I remember, you 

were standing directly behind it when the lights went out." Miss 

Hinchliffe laughed heartily. "Highly suspicious character, aren't you, 

Murgatroyd? But who'd think it to look at you. Here, give me that trowel 

- thank heavens it isn't really a revolver. You'd have shot yourself by 

now!"  



 

IV 

 

"It's a most extraordinary thing," muttered Colonel Easterbrook. "Most 

extraordinary. Laura."  

 

"Yes, darling?"  

 

"Come into my dressing-room a moment."  

 

"What is it, darling?"  

 

Mrs. Easterbrook appeared through the open door. 

 

"Remember my showing you that revolver of mine?"  

 

"Oh, yes, Archie, a nasty horrid black thing."  

 

"Yes. Hun souvenir. Was in this drawer, wasn't it?"  

 

"Yes, it was."  

 

"Well, it's not there now."  

 

"Archie, how extraordinary!"  

 

"You haven't moved it or anything?"  

 

"Oh, no, I'd never dare to touch the horrid thing."  



 

"Think old mother what's-the-name did?"  

 

"Oh, I shouldn't think so, for a minute. Mrs. Butt would never do a thing 

like that. Shall I ask her?"  

 

"No - no, better not. Don't want to start a lot of talk. Tell me, do you 

remember when it was I showed it to you?"  

 

"Oh, about a week ago. You were grumbling about your collars and the 

laundry and you opened this drawer wide and there it was at the back 

and I asked you what it was."  

 

"Yes, that's right. About a week ago. You don't remember the date?"  

 

Mrs. Easterbrook considered, eyelids down over her eyes, a shrewd 

brain working. 

 

"Of course," she said. "It was Saturday. The day we were to have gone 

in to the pictures, but we didn't."  

 

"H'm - sure it wasn't before that? Wednesday? Thursday or even the 

week before that again?"  

 

"No, dear," said Mrs. Easterbrook. "I remember quite distinctly. It was 

Saturday the 30th. It just seems a long time because of all the trouble 

there's been. And I can tell you how I remember. It's because it was the 

day after the hold-up at Miss Blacklog's. Because when I saw your 

revolver it reminded me of the shooting the night before."  



 

"Ah," said Colonel Easterbrook, "then that's a great load off my mind."  

 

"Oh, Archie, why?"  

 

"Just because if that revolver had disappeared before the shooting - 

well, it might possibly have been my revolver that was pinched by that 

Swiss fellow."  

 

"But how would he have known you had one?"  

 

"These gangs have a most extraordinary communication service. They 

get to know everything about a place and who lives there." 

 

"What a lot you do know, Archie."  

 

"Ha. Yes. Seen a thing or two in my time. Still as you definitely 

remember seeing my revolver after the hold-up - well, that settles it. 

The revolver that Swiss fellow used can't have been mine, can it?"  

 

"Of course it can't."  

 

"A great relief. I should have had to go to the police about it. And they 

ask a lot of awkward questions. Bound to. As a matter of fact I never 

took out a licence for it. Somehow, after a war, one forgets these 

peacetime regulations. I looked on it as a war souvenir, not as a 

firearm."  

 

"Yes, I see. Of course."  



 

"But all the same - where on earth can the damned thing be?"  

 

"Perhaps Mrs. Butt took it. She's always seemed quite honest, but 

perhaps she felt nervous after the holdup and thought she'd like to - to 

have a revolver in the house. Of course, she'll never admit doing that. I 

shan't even ask her. She might get offended. And what should we do 

then? This is such a big house - I simply couldn't -" 

 

"Quite so," said Colonel Easterbrook. "Better not say anything." 

 

Chapter 13 MORNING ACTIVITIES IN CHIPPING CLEGHORN 

(CONTINUED) 

 

Miss Marple came out of the Vicarage gate and walked down the little 

lane that led into the main street. 

 

She walked fairly briskly with the aid of the Rev. Julian Harmon's stout 

ashplant stick. 

 

She passed the Red Cow and the butcher's and stopped for a brief 

moment to look into the window of Mr. Elliot's antique shop. This was 

cunningly situated next door to the Bluebird Tearooms and Café so that 

rich motorists, after stopping for a nice cup of tea and somewhat 

euphemistically named 'Home Made Cakes' of a bright saffron colour, 

could be tempted by Mr. Elliot's judiciously planned shop window. 

 

In this antique bow frame, Mr. Elliot catered for all tastes. Two pieces of 

Waterford glass reposed on an impeccable wine cooler. A walnut 



bureau, made up of various bits and pieces proclaimed itself a Genuine 

Bargain and on a table, in the window itself, were a nice assortment of 

cheap doorknockers and quaint pixies, a few chipped bits of Dresden, a 

couple of sad-looking bead necklaces, a mug with "A Present from 

Tunbridge Wells"on it, and some tit-bits of Victorian silver. 

 

Miss Marple gave the window her rapt attention, and Mr. Elliot, an 

elderly obese spider, peeped out of his web to appraise the possibilities 

of this new fly. 

 

But just as he decided that the charms of the Present from Tunbridge 

Wells were about to be too much for the lady who was staying at the 

Vicarage (for of course Mr. Elliot, like everybody else, knew exactly 

who she was), Miss Marple saw out of the corner of her eye Miss Dora 

Bunner entering the Bluebird Cafe, and immediately decided that what 

she needed to counteract the cold wind was a nice cup of morning 

coffee. 

 

Four or five ladies were already engaged in sweetening their morning 

shopping by a pause for refreshment. Miss Marple, blinking a little in 

the gloom of the interior of the Bluebird, and hovering artistically, was 

greeted by the voice of Dora Bunner at her elbow. 

 

"Oh, good morning, Miss Marple. Do sit down here. I'm all alone."  

 

"Thank you."  

 

Miss Marple subsided gratefully on to the rather angular little blue-

painted arm-chair which the Bluebird affected. 



 

"Such a sharp wind," she complained. "And I can't walk very fast 

because of my rheumatic leg."  

 

"Oh, I know. I had sciatica one year - and really, most of the time I was 

in agony."  

 

The two ladies talked rheumatism, sciatica and neuritis for some 

moments with avidity. A sulky-looking girl in a pink overall with a flight 

of bluebirds down the front of it took their order for coffee and cakes 

with a yawn and an air of weary patience. 

 

"The cakes," Miss Bunner said in a conspiratorial whisper, "are really 

quite good here."  

 

"I was so interested in that very pretty girl I met as we were coming 

away from Miss Blacklog's the other day," said Miss Marple. "I think she 

said she does gardening. Or is she on the land? Hynes - was that her 

name?" 

 

"Oh, yes,  PhillipaHaymes. Our 'Lodger,' as we call her." Miss Bunner 

laughed at her own humour. 

 

"Such a nice quiet girl. A lady, if you know what I mean."  

 

"I wonder now. I knew a Colonel Haymes - in the Indian cavalry. Her 

father perhaps?"  

 



"She's PhillipaHaymes. A widow. Her husband was killed in Sicily or Italy. 

Of course, it might be his father."  

 

"I wondered, perhaps, if there might be a little romance on the way?" 

Miss Marple suggested roguishly. "With that tall young man?"  

 

"With Patrick, do you mean? Oh, I don't -" 

 

"No, I meant a young man with spectacles. I've seen him about."  

 

"Oh, of course, Edmund Swettenham. Sh! That's his mother, Mrs. 

Swettenham, over in the corner. I don't know, I'm sure. You think he 

admires her? He's such an odd young man - says the most disturbing 

things sometimes. He's supposed to be clever, you know," said Miss 

Bunner with frank disapproval. 

 

"Cleverness isn't everything," said Miss Marple, shaking her head. "Ah, 

here is our coffee."  

 

The sulky girl deposited it with a clatter. Miss Marple and Miss Bunner 

pressed cakes on each other. 

 

"I was so interested to hear you were at school with Miss Blacklog. 

Yours is indeed an old friendship."  

 

"Yes, indeed." Miss Bunner sighed. "Very few people would be as loyal 

to their old friends as dear Miss Blacklog is. Oh, dear, those days seem 

a long time ago. Such a pretty girl and enjoyed life so much. It all 

seemed so sad."  



 

Miss Marple, though with no idea of what had seemed so sad, sighed 

and shook her head. 

 

"Life is indeed hard," she murmured. 

 

"And sad affliction bravely borne," murmured Miss Bunner, her eyes 

suffusing with tears. "I always think of that verse. True patience; true 

resignation. Such courage and patience ought to be rewarded, that is 

what I say. What I feel is that nothing is too good for dear Miss Blacklog, 

and whatever good things come to her, she truly deserves them."  

 

"Money," said Miss Marple, "can do a lot to ease one's path in life."  

 

She felt herself safe in this observation since she judged that it must be 

Miss Blacklog's prospects of future affluence to which her friend 

referred. 

 

The remark, however, started Miss Bunner on another train of thought. 

 

"Money!" she exclaimed with bitterness. "I don't believe, you know, that 

until one has really experienced it, one can know what money, or rather 

the lack of it, means."  

 

Miss Marple nodded her white head sympathetically. 

 

Miss Bunner went on rapidly, working herself up, and speaking with a 

flushed face: "I've heard people say so often 'I'd rather have flowers on 

the table than a meal without them.' But how many meals have those 



people ever missed? They don't know what it is - nobody knows who 

hasn't been through it - to be really hungry. Bread, you know, and a jar 

of meat paste, and a scrape of margarine. Day after day, and how one 

longs for a good plate of meat and two vegetables. And the shabbiness. 

Darning one's clothes and hoping it won't show. And applying for jobs 

and always being told you're too old. And then perhaps getting a job 

and after all one isn't strong enough. One faints. And you're back again. 

It's the rent - always the rent - that's got to be paid - otherwise you're 

out in the street. And in these days it leaves so little over. One's old age 

pension doesn't go far - indeed it doesn't."  

 

"I know," said Miss Marple gently. She looked with compassion at Miss 

Bunner's twitching face. 

 

"I wrote to Letty. I just happened to see her name in the paper. It was a 

luncheon in aid of Milchester Hospital. There it was in black and white. 

Miss  Blacklog. It brought the past back to me. I hadn't heard of 

her for years and years. She'd been secretary, you know, to that very 

rich man, Goedler. She was always a clever girl - the kind that gets on 

in the world. Not so much looks - as character. I thought - well, I thought 

- perhaps she'll remember me - and she's one of the people I could ask 

for a little help. I mean someone you've known as a girl - been at school 

with - well, they do know about you - they know you're not just a 

begging letter writer -" 

 

Tears came into Dora Bunner's eyes. 

 

"And then Lotty came and took me away - said she needed someone to 

help her. Of course, I was very surprised - very surprised - but then 



newspapers do get things wrong. How kind she was - and how 

sympathetic. And remembering all the old days so well... I'd do anything 

for her - I really would. And I try very hard, but I'm afraid sometimes I 

muddle things - my head's not what it was. I make mistakes. And I 

forget and say foolish things. She's very patient. What's so nice about 

her is that she always pretends that I am useful to her. That's real 

kindness, isn't it?"  

 

Miss Marple said gently: "Yes, that's real kindness."  

 

"I used to worry, you know, even after I came to Little Paddocks - about 

what would become of me if anything were to happen to Miss Blacklog. 

After all, there are so many accidents - these motors dashing about one 

never knows, does one? But naturally I never said anything - but she 

must have guessed. Suddenly, one day she told me that she'd left me a 

small annuity in her will and - what I value far more - all her beautiful 

furniture. I was quite overcome... But she said nobody else would value 

it as I should - and that is quite true - I can't bear to see some lovely 

piece of china smashed - or wet glasses put down on a table and 

leaving a mark. I do really look after her things. Some people - some 

people especially, are so terribly careless - and sometimes worse than 

careless! 

 

"I'm not really as stupid as I look," Miss Bunner continued with 

simplicity. "I can see, you know, when Letty's being imposed upon. 

Some people - I won't name names - but they take advantage. Dear Miss 

Blacklog is, perhaps, just a shade too trusting."  

 

Miss Marple shook her head. 



 

"That's a mistake."  

 

"Yes, it is. You and I, Miss Marple, know the world. Dear Miss Blacklog -

" She shook her head. 

 

Miss Marple thought that as the secretary of a big financier Miss 

Blacklog might be presumed to know the world too. But probably what 

Dora Bunner meant was that  Blacklog had always been 

comfortably off, and that the comfortably off do not know the deeper 

abysses of human nature. 

 

"That Patrick!" said Miss Bunner with a suddenness and an asperity 

that made Miss Marple jump. "Twice, at least, to my knowledge, he's 

got money out of her. Pretending he's hard up. Run into debt. All that 

sort of thing. She's far too generous. All she said to me when I 

remonstrated with her was: 'The boy's young, Dora. Youth is the time to 

have your fling.'" 

 

"Well, that's true enough," said Miss Marple. "Such a handsome young 

man, too."  

 

"Handsome is as handsome does," said Dora Bunner. "Much too fond of 

poking fun at people. And a lot of going on with girls. I expect. I'm just a 

figure of fun to him - that's all. He doesn't seem to realise that people 

have their feelings."  

 

"Young people are rather careless that way," said Miss Marple. 

 



Miss Bunner leaned forward suddenly with a mysterious air. 

 

"You won't breathe a word, will you, my dear?" she demanded. "But I 

can't help feeling that he was mixed up in this dreadful business. I think 

he knew that young man - or else Julia did. I daren't hint at such a thing 

to dear Miss Blacklog - at least I did, and she just snapped my head off. 

And, of course, it's awkward - because he's her nephew - or at any rate 

her cousin - and if the Swiss young man shot himself Patrick might be 

held morally responsible, mightn't he? If he'd put him up to it, I mean. 

I'm really terribly confused about the whole thing. Everyone making 

such a fuss about that other door into the drawing-room. That's another 

thing that worries me - the detective saying it had been oiled. Because 

you see, I saw -" 

 

She came to an abrupt stop. Miss Marple paused to select a phrase. 

 

"Most difficult for you," she said sympathetically. "Naturally you 

wouldn't want anything to get round to the police."  

 

"That's just it," Dora Bunner cried. "I lie awake at nights and worry... 

because, you see, I came upon Patrick in the shrubbery the other day. I 

was looking for eggs - one hen lays out - and there he was holding a 

feather and a cup - an oily cup. And he jumped most guiltily when he 

saw me and he said: 'I was just wondering what this was doing here.' 

Well, of course, he's a quick thinker. I should say he thought that up 

quickly when I startled him. And how did he come to find a thing like 

that in the shrubbery unless he was looking for it, knowing perfectly 

well it was there. Of course, I didn't say anything."  

 



"No, no, of course not."  

 

"But I gave him a look, if you know what I mean."  

 

Dora Bunner stretched out her hand and bit abstractedly into a lurid 

salmon coloured cake. 

 

"And then another day I happened to overhear him having a very 

curious conversation with Julia. They seemed to be having a kind of 

quarrel. He was saying: 'If I thought you had anything to do with a thing 

like that!' and Julia (she's always so calm, you know) said: 'Well, little 

brother, what would you do about it?' And then, most unfortunately, I 

trod on that board that always squeaks, and they saw me. So I said, 

quite gaily: 'You two having a quarrel?' and Patrick said, 'I'm warning 

Julia not to go in for these black market deals.' Oh, it was all very slick, 

but I don't believe they were talking about anything of the sort! And if 

you ask me, I believe Patrick had tampered with that lamp in the 

drawing-room - to make the lights go out, because I remember 

distinctly that it was the shepherdess - not the shepherd. And the next 

day -" 

 

She stopped and her face grew pink. Miss Marple turned her head to 

see Miss Blacklog, standing behind them - she must just have come in. 

 

"Coffee and gossip, Bunny?" said Miss Blacklog with quite a shade of 

reproach in her voice. "Good morning, Miss Marple. Cold, isn't it?"  

 

"We were just talking," said Miss Bunner, hurriedly. "So many rules and 

regulations nowadays. One really doesn't know where one is."  



 

The doors flew open with a clang and Bunch Harmon came into the 

Bluebird with a rush. 

 

"Hallo," she said, "am I too late for coffee?" 

 

"No, dear," said Miss Marple. "Sit down and have a cup."  

 

"We must get home," said Miss Blacklog. "Done your shopping. 

Bunny?"  

 

Her tone was indulgent once more, but her eyes still held a slight 

reproach. 

 

"Yes - yes, thank you, Letty. I must just pop into the chemists' in passing 

and get some aspirin and some cornplasters."  

 

As the doors of the Bluebird swung to behind them, Bunch asked: 

 

"What were you talking about?"  

 

Miss Marple did not reply at once. She waited whilst Bunch gave the 

order, then she said: 

 

"Family solidarity is a very strong thing. Very strong. Do you remember 

some famous case - I really can't remember what it was. They said the 

husband poisoned his wife. In a glass of wine. Then, at the trial, the 

daughter said she'd drunk half her mother's glass - so that knocked the 

case against her father to pieces. They do say - but that may be just 



rumour - that she never spoke to her father or lived with him again. Of 

course, a father is one thing - and a nephew or a distant cousin is 

another. But still there it is - no one wants a member of their own family 

hanged, do they?"  

 

"No," said Bunch, considering. "I shouldn't think they would."  

 

Miss Marple leaned back in her chair. She murmured under her breath, 

"People are really very alike, everywhere."  

 

"Who am I like?"  

 

"Well, really, dear, you are very much like yourself. I don't know that 

you remind me of anyone in particular. Except perhaps -" 

 

"Here it comes," said Bunch. 

 

"I was just thinking of a parlourmaid of mine, dear."  

 

"A parlourmaid? I should make a terrible parlourmaid."  

 

"Yes, dear, so did she. She was no good at all at waiting at table. Put 

everything on the table crooked, mixed up the kitchen knives with the 

dining-room ones, and her cap (this was a long time ago, dear) her cap 

was never straight."  

 

Bunch adjusted her hat automatically. 

 

"Anything else?" she demanded anxiously. 



 

"I kept her because she was so pleasant to have about the house - and 

because she used to make me laugh. I liked the way she said things 

straight out. Came to me one day, 'Of course, I don't know, m'am,' she 

says, 'but Florrie, the way she sits down, it's just like a married woman.' 

And sure enough poor Florrie was in trouble - the gentlemanly assistant 

at the hairdresser's. Fortunately it was in good time, and I was able to 

have a little talk with him, and they had a very nice wedding and settled 

down quite happily. She was a good girl, Florrie, but inclined to be 

taken in by a gentlemanly appearance."  

 

"She didn't do a murder, did she?" asked Bunch. "The parlourmaid, I 

mean."  

 

"No, indeed," said Miss Marple. "She married a Baptist Minister and 

they had a family of five."  

 

"Just like me," said Bunch. "Though I've only got as far as Edward and 

Susan up to date."  

 

She added, after a minute or two: "Who are you thinking about now, 

Aunt Jane?"  

 

"Quite a lot of people, dear, quite a lot of people," said Miss Marple, 

vaguely. 

 

"In St. Mary Mead?"  

 



"Mostly... I was really thinking about Nurse Ellerton - really an excellent 

kindly woman. Took care of an old lady, seemed really fond of her. Then 

the old lady died. And another came and she died. Morphia. It all came 

out. Done in the kindest way, and the shocking thing was that the 

woman herself really couldn't see that she'd done anything wrong. They 

hadn't long to live in any case, she said, and one of them had cancer 

and quite a lot of pain."  

 

"You mean - it was a mercy killing?"  

 

"No, no. They signed their money away to her. She liked money, you 

know... 

 

"And then there was that young man on the liner - Mrs. Pusey at the 

paper shop, her nephew. Brought home stuff he'd stolen and got her to 

dispose of it. Said it was things that he'd bought abroad. She was quite 

taken in. And then when the police came round and started asking 

questions, he tried to bash her on the head, so that she shouldn't be 

able to give him away... Not a nice young man - but very good-looking. 

Had two girls in love with him. He spent a lot of money on one of them."  

 

"The nastiest one, I suppose," said Bunch. 

 

"Yes, dear. And there was Mrs. Cray at the wool shop. Devoted to her 

son, spoilt him, of course. He got in with a very queer lot. Do you 

remember Joan Croft, Bunch?"  

 

"N-no, I don't think so."  

 



"I thought you might have seen her when you were with me on a visit. 

Used to stalk about smoking a cigar or a pipe. We had a Bank hold-up 

once, and Joan Croft was in the Bank at the time. She knocked the man 

down and took his revolver away from him. She was congratulated on 

her courage by the Bench."  

 

Bunch listened attentively. She seemed to be learning by heart. 

 

"And -" she prompted. 

 

"That girl at St. Jean des Collines that summer. Such a quiet girl - not so 

much quiet as silent. Everybody liked her, but they never got to know 

her much better... We heard afterwards that her husband was a forger. 

It made her feel cut off from people. It made her, in the end, a little 

queer. Brooding does, you know."  

 

"Any Anglo-Indian Colonels in your reminiscences, darling?"  

 

"Naturally, dear. There was Major Vaughan at The Larches and Colonel 

Wright at Simla Lodge. Nothing wrong with either of them. But I do 

remember Mr. Hodgson, the Bank Manager, went on a cruise and 

married a woman young enough to be his daughter. No idea of where 

she came from - except what she told him of course."  

 

"And that wasn't true?"  

 

"No, dear, it definitely wasn't."  

 



"Not bad," said Bunch nodding, and ticking people off on her fingers. 

"We've had devoted Dora, and handsome Patrick, and Mrs. 

Swettenham and Edmund, and  PhillipaHaymes, and Colonel 

Easterbrook and Mrs. Easterbrook - and if you ask me, I should say 

you're absolutely right about her. But there wouldn't be any reason for 

her murdering Blacklog."  

 

"Miss Blacklog, of course, might know something about her that she 

didn't want known."  

 

"Oh, darling, that old Tanqueray stuff? Surely that's dead as the hills."  

 

"It might not be. You see, Bunch, you are not the kind that minds much 

about what people think of you."  

 

"I see what you mean," said Bunch suddenly. "If you'd been up against 

it, and then, rather like a shivering stray cat, you'd found a home and a 

cream and a warm stroking hand and you were called Pretty Pussy and 

somebody thought the world of you... You'd do a lot to keep that... Well, 

I must say, you've presented me with a very complete gallery of 

people."  

 

"You didn't get them all right, you know," said Miss Marple, mildly. 

 

"Didn't I? Where did I slip up? Julia? Julia, pretty Juliar is peculiar."  

 

"Three and sixpence," said the sulky waitress, materialising out of the 

gloom. 

 



"And," she added, her bosom heaving beneath the bluebirds, "I'd like to 

know, Mrs. Harmon, why you call me peculiar. I had an aunt who joined 

the Peculiar People, but I've always been good Church of England 

myself, as the late Rev. Hopkinson can tell you."  

 

"I'm terribly sorry," said Bunch. "I was just quoting a song. I didn't 

mean you at all. I didn't know your name was Julia."  

 

"Quite a coincidence," said the sulky waitress, cheering up. "No 

offence, I'm sure, but hearing my name, as I thought - well, naturally if 

you think someone's talking about you, it's only human nature to listen. 

Thank you."  

 

She departed with her tip. 

 

"Aunt Marple," said Bunch, "don't look so upset. What is it?"  

 

"But surely," murmured Miss Marple. "That couldn't be so. There's no 

reason -" 

 

"Aunt Marple!"  

 

Miss Marple sighed and then smiled brightly. 

 

"It's nothing, dear," she said. 

 

"Did you think you knew who did the murder?" asked Bunch. "Who was 

it?"  

 



"I don't know at all," said Miss Marple. "I got an idea for a moment - but 

it's gone. I wish I did know. Time's so short. So terribly short." 

 

"What do you mean short?"  

 

"That old lady up in Scotland may die any moment."  

 

Bunch said, staring: "Then you really do believe in Pip and Emma. You 

think it was them - and that they'll try again?"  

 

"Of course they'll try again," said Miss Marple, almost absentmindedly. 

"If they tried once, they'll try again. If you've made up your mind to 

murder someone, you don't stop because the first time it didn't come off. 

Especially if you're fairly sure you're not suspected."  

 

"But if it's Pip and Emma," said Bunch, "there are only two people it 

could be. It must be Patrick and Julia. They're brother and sister and 

they're the only ones who are the right age."  

 

"My dear, it isn't nearly as simple as that. There are all sort of 

ramifications and combinations. There's Pip's wife if he's married, or 

Emma's husband. There's their mother - she's an interested party even 

if she doesn't inherit direct. If Blacklog hasn't seen her for thirty 

years, she'd probably not recognise her now. One elderly woman is 

very like another. You remember Mrs. Wotherspoon drew her own and 

Mrs. Bartlett's Old Age Pension although Mrs. Bartlett had been dead 

for years. Anyway, Miss Blacklog's shortsighted. Haven't you noticed 

how she peers at people? And then there's the father. Apparently he 

was a real bad lot."  



 

"Yes, but he's a foreigner."  

 

"By birth. But there's no reason to believe he speaks broken English 

and gesticulates with his hands. I dare say he could play the part of - of 

an Anglo-Indian Colonel as well as anybody else."  

 

"Is that what you think?"  

 

"No, I don't. I don't indeed, dear. I just think that there's a great deal of 

money at stake, a great deal of money. And I'm afraid I know only too 

well the really terrible things that people will do to lay their hands on a 

lot of money."  

 

"I suppose they will," said Bunch. "It doesn't really do them any good, 

does it? Not in the end?"  

 

"No - but they don't usually know that."  

 

"I can understand it." Bunch smiled suddenly, her sweet rather crooked 

smile. "One feels it would be different for oneself... Even I feel that." 

She considered: "You pretend to yourself that you'd do a lot of good 

with all that money. Schemes... Homes for Unwanted Children... Tired 

Mothers... A lovely rest abroad somewhere for elderly women who have 

worked too hard..."  

 

Her face grew sombre. Her eyes were suddenly dark and tragic. 

 



"I know what you're thinking," she said to Miss Marple. "You're thinking 

that I'd be the worst kind. Because I'd kid myself. If you just wanted the 

money for selfish reasons you'd at any rate see what you were like. But 

once you began to pretend about doing good with it, you'd be able to 

persuade yourself, perhaps, that it wouldn't very much matter killing 

someone..."  

 

Then her eyes cleared. 

 

"But I shouldn't," she said. "I shouldn't really kill anyone. Not even if 

they were old, or ill, or doing a lot of harm in the world. Not even if they 

were blackmailers or - or absolute beasts." She fished a fly carefully 

out of the dregs of the coffee and arranged it on the table to dry. 

"Because people like living, don't they? So do flies. Even if you're old 

and in pain and you can just crawl out in the sun. Julian says those 

people like living even more than young strong people do. It's harder 

for them to die, the struggle's greater. I like living myself - not just being 

happy and enjoying myself and having a good time. I mean living - 

waking up and feeling, all over me, that I'm there - ticking over."  

 

She blew on the fly gently; it waved its legs, and flew rather drunkenly 

away. 

 

"Cheer up, darling Aunt Marple," said Bunch. "I'd never kill anybody." 

 

Chapter 14 EXCURSION INTO THE PAST 

 

After a night in the train, Inspector Craddock alighted at a small station 

in the Highlands. 



 

It struck him for a moment as strange that the wealthy Mrs. Goedler - an 

invalid - with a choice of a London house in a fashionable square, an 

estate in Hampshire, and a villa in the South of France, should have 

selected this remote Scottish home as her residence. Surely she was 

cut off here from many friends and distractions. It must be a lonely life - 

or was she too ill to notice or care about her surroundings? 

 

A car was waiting to meet him. A big old-fashioned Daimler with an 

elderly chauffeur driving it. It was a sunny morning and the inspector 

enjoyed the twenty mile drive, though he marvelled anew at this 

preference for isolation. A tentative remark to the chauffeur brought 

partial enlightenment. 

 

"It's her own home as a girl. Ay, she's the last of the family. And she and 

Mr. Goedler were always happier here than anywhere, though it wasn't 

often he could get away from London. But when he did they enjoyed 

themselves like a couple of bairns."  

 

When the grey walls of the old keep came in sight, Craddock felt that 

time was slipping backwards. An elderly butler received him, and after 

a wash and a shave, he was shown into a room with a huge fire burning 

in the grate, and breakfast was served to him. 

 

After breakfast, a tall middle-aged woman in nurse's dress, with a 

pleasant and competent manner, came in and introduced herself as 

Sister McClelland. 

 



"I have my patient all ready for you, Mr. Craddock. She is, indeed, 

looking forward to seeing you."  

 

"I'll do my best not to excite her," Craddock promised. 

 

"I had better warn you of what will happen. You will find Mrs. Goedler 

apparently quite normal. She will talk and enjoy talking and then - quite 

suddenly - her powers will fail. Come away at once, then, and send for 

me. She is, you see, kept almost entirely under the influence of morphia. 

She drowses most of the time. In preparation for your visit, I have given 

her a strong stimulant. As soon as the effect of the stimulant wears off, 

she will relapse into semiconsciousness."  

 

"I quite understand, Miss McClelland. Would it be in order for you to tell 

me exactly what the state of Mrs. Goedler's health is?"  

 

"Well, Mr. Craddock, she is a dying woman. Her life cannot be 

prolonged for more than a few weeks. To say that she should have been 

dead years ago would strike you as odd, yet it is the truth. What has 

kept Mrs. Goedler alive is her intense enjoyment and love of being alive. 

That sounds, perhaps, an odd thing to say of someone who has lived 

the life of an invalid for many years and has not left her home here for 

fifteen years, but it is true. Mrs. Goedler has never been a strong 

woman - but she has retained to an astonishing degree the will to live." 

She added with a smile, "She is a very charming woman, too, as you will 

find."  

 

Craddock was shown into a large bedroom where a fire was burning 

and where an old lady lay in a large canopied bed. Though she was only 



about seven or eight years older than  Blacklog, her fragility 

made her seem older than her years. 

 

Her white hair was carefully arranged, a froth of pale blue wool 

enveloped her neck and shoulders. There were lines of pain on the face, 

but lines of sweetness, too. And there was, strangely enough, what 

Craddock could only describe as a roguish twinkle in her faded blue 

eyes. 

 

"Well, this is interesting," she said. "It's not often I receive a visit from 

the police. I hear Blacklog wasn't much hurt by this attempt on 

her? How is my dear Blackie?"  

 

"She's very well, Mrs. Goedler. She sent you her love."  

 

"It's a long time since I've seen her... For many years now, it's been just 

a card at Christmas. I asked her to come up here when she came back 

to England after Blacklog's death, but she said it would be painful after 

so long and perhaps she was right... Blackie always had a lot of sense. I 

had an old school friend to see me about a year ago," - she smiled - "we 

bored each other to death. After we'd finished all the 'Do you 

remembers?' there wasn't anything to say. Most embarrassing."  

 

Craddock was content to let her talk before pressing his questions. He 

wanted, as it were, to get back into the past, to get the feel of the 

Goedler- ménage. 

 

"I suppose," said Belle shrewdly, "that you want to ask about the 

money? Randall left it all to go to Blackie after my death. Really, of 



course, Randall never dreamed that I'd outlive him. He was a big strong 

man, never a day's illness, and I was always a mass of aches and pains 

and complaints and doctors coming and pulling long faces over me."  

 

"I don't think complaints would be the right word, Mrs. Goedler."  

 

The old lady chuckled. 

 

"I didn't mean it in the complaining sense. I've never been too sorry for 

myself. But it was always taken for granted that I, being the weakly one, 

would go first. It didn't work out that way. No - it didn't work out that 

way..."  

 

"Why, exactly, did your husband leave his money the way he did?"  

 

"You mean, why did he leave it to Blackie? Not for the reason you've 

probably been thinking." The roguish twinkle was very apparent. "What 

minds you policemen have! Randall was never in the least in love with 

her and she wasn't with him. Blacklog, you know, has really got a man's 

mind. She hasn't any feminine feelings or weaknesses. I don't believe 

she was ever in love with any man. She was never particularly pretty 

and she didn't care for clothes. She used a little make-up in deference 

to prevailing custom, but not to make herself look prettier." There was 

pity in the old voice as she went on: "She never knew any of the fun of 

being a woman." Craddock looked at the frail little figure in the big bed 

with interest. Belle Goedler, he realised, had enjoyed - still enjoyed - 

being a woman. She twinkled at him. 

 

"I've always thought," she said, "it must be terribly dull to be a man."  



 

Then she said thoughtfully: 

 

"I think Randall looked on Blackie very much as a kind of younger 

brother. He relied on her judgment which was always excellent. She 

kept him out of trouble more than once, you know."  

 

"She told me that she came to his rescue once with money?"  

 

"That, yes, but I meant more than that. One can speak the truth after all 

these years. Randall couldn't really distinguish between what was 

crooked and what wasn't. His conscience wasn't sensitive. The poor 

dear really didn't know what was just smart - and what was dishonest. 

Blackie kept him straight. That's one thing about Letitia , she's 

absolutely dead straight. She would never do anything that was 

dishonest. She's a very fine character, you know. I've always admired 

her. They had a terrible girlhood, those girls. The father was an old 

country doctor - terrifically pig-headed and narrow-minded - the 

complete family tyrant. Letitia broke away, came to London, and 

trained herself as a chartered accountant. The other sister was an 

invalid, there was a deformity of kinds and she never saw people or 

went out. That's why when the old man died, Letitia gave up everything 

to go home and look after her sister. Randall was wild with her - but it 

made no difference. If Letitia thought a thing was her duty she'd do it. 

And you couldn't move her."  

 

"How long was that before your husband died?"  

 



"A couple of years, I think. Randall made his will before she left the firm, 

and he didn't alter it. He said to me: 'We've no one of our own.' (Our little 

boy died, you know, when he was two years old.) 'After you and I are 

gone, Blackie had better have the money. She'll play the markets and 

make 'em sit up.' 

 

"You see," Belle went on, "Randall enjoyed the whole money-making 

game so much - it wasn't just the money - it was the adventure, the risks, 

the excitement of it all. And Blackie liked it too. She had the same 

adventurous spirit and the same judgment. Poor darling, she'd never 

had any of the usual fun - being in love, and leading men on and teasing 

them - and having a home and children and all the real fun of life."  

 

Craddock thought it was odd, the real pity and indulgent contempt felt 

by this woman, a woman whose life had been hampered by illness, 

whose only child had died, whose husband had died, leaving her to a 

lonely widowhood, and who had been a hopeless invalid for years. 

 

She nodded her head at him. 

 

"I know what you're thinking. But I've had all the things that make life 

worthwhile - they may have been taken from me - but I have had them. I 

was pretty and gay as a girl, I married the man I loved, and he never 

stopped loving me... My child died, but I had him for two precious 

years... I've had a lot of physical pain but if you have pain, you know 

how to enjoy the exquisite pleasure of the times when pain stops. And 

everyone's been kind to me, always... I'm a lucky woman, really."  

 

Craddock seized upon an opening in her former remarks. 



 

"You said just now, Mrs. Goedler, that your husband left his fortune to 

Letitia because he had no one else to leave it to. But that's not 

strictly true, is it? He had a sister."  

 

"Oh, Sonia. But they quarrelled years ago and made a clean break of 

it."  

 

"He disapproved of her marriage?"  

 

"Yes, she married a man called - now what was his name?"  

 

"Stamfordis."  

 

"That's it. Dmitri Stamfordis. Randall always said he was a crook. The 

two men didn't like each other from the first. But Sonia was wildly in 

love with him and quite determined to marry him. And I really never saw 

why she shouldn't. Men have such odd ideas about these things. Sonia 

wasn't a mere girl - she was twenty-five, and she knew exactly what she 

was doing. He was a crook, I dare say - I mean really a crook. I believe 

he had a criminal record - and Randall always suspected the name he 

was passing under here wasn't his own. Sonia knew all that. The point 

was, which of course Randall couldn't appreciate, that Dmitri was really 

a wildly attractive person to women. And he was just as much in love 

with Sonia as she was with him. Randall insisted that he was just 

marrying her for her money but that wasn't true. Sonia was very 

handsome, you know. And she had plenty of spirit. If the marriage had 

turned out badly, if Dmitri had been unkind to her or unfaithful to her, 



she would just have cut her losses and walked out on him. She was a 

rich woman and could do as she chose with her life."  

 

"The quarrel was never made up?"  

 

"No. Randall and Sonia never had got on very well. She resented his 

trying to prevent the marriage. She said, 'Very well. You're quite 

impossible! This is the last you hear of me!'" 

 

"But it was not the last you heard of her?"  

 

Belle smiled. 

 

"No, I got a letter from her about eighteen months afterwards. She 

wrote from Budapest, I remember, but she didn't give an address. She 

told me to tell Randall that she was extremely happy and that she'd just 

had twins." 

 

"And she told you their names?"  

 

Again Belle smiled. "She said they were born just after midday - and 

she intended to call them Pip and Emma. That may have been just a 

joke, of course."  

 

"Didn't you hear from her again?"  

 

"No. She said she and her husband and the babies were going to 

America on a short stay. I never heard any more..."  

 



"You don't happen, I suppose, to have kept that letter?"  

 

"No, I'm afraid not... I read it to Randall and he first grunted: 'She'll 

regret marrying that fellow one of these days.' That's all he ever said 

about it. We really forgot about her. She went right out of our lives..."  

 

"Nevertheless Mr. Goedler left his estate to her children in the event of 

Letitia predeceasing you?"  

 

"Oh, that was my doing. I said to him, when he told me about the will: 

'And suppose Blackie dies before I do?' He was quite surprised. I said, 

'Oh, I know Blackie is as strong as a horse and I'm a delicate creature 

but there's such a thing as accidents, you know, and there's such a 

thing as creaking gates...' And he said, 'There's no one - absolutely no 

one.' I said, 'There's Sonia.' And he said at once, 'And let that fellow get 

hold of my money? No - indeed!' I said, 'Well, her children then. Pip and 

Emma, and there may be lots more by now, and so he grumbled, but he 

did put it in."  

 

"And from that day to this," Craddock said slowly, "you've heard 

nothing of your sister-in-law or her children?"  

 

"Nothing - they may be dead - they may be - anywhere."  

 

They may be in Chipping Cleghorn, thought Craddock. 

 

As though she read his thoughts, a look of alarm came into Belle 

Goedler's eyes. She said, "Don't let them hurt Blackie. Blackie's good - 

really good - you mustn't let harm come to -" 



 

Her voice trailed off suddenly. Craddock saw the sudden grey shadows 

round her mouth and eyes. 

 

"You're tired," he said. "I'll go."  

 

She nodded. 

 

"Send Mac to me," she whispered. "Yes, tired..."  

 

She made a feeble motion of her hand. "Look after Blackie... Nothing 

must happen to Blackie... look after her..."  

 

"I'll do my very best, Mrs. Goedler." He rose and went to the door. 

 

Her voice, a thin thread of sound, followed him... 

 

"Not long now - until I'm dead - dangerous for her - take care..."  

 

Sister McClelland passed him as he went out. He said, uneasily: 

 

"I hope I haven't done her harm."  

 

"Oh, I don't think so, Mr. Craddock. I told you she would tire quite 

suddenly."  

 

Later, he asked the nurse: 

 



"The only thing I hadn't time to ask Mrs. Goedler was whether she had 

any old photographs? If so, I wonder -" 

 

She interrupted him. 

 

"I'm afraid there's nothing of that kind. All her personal papers and 

things were stored with their furniture from the London house at the 

beginning of the war. Mrs. Goedler was desperately ill at the time. Then 

the storage depository was blitzed. Mrs. Goedler was very upset at 

losing so many personal souvenirs and family papers. I'm afraid there's 

nothing of that kind."  

 

So that was that, Craddock thought. 

 

Yet he felt his journey had not been in vain. Pip and Emma, those twin 

wraiths, were not quite wraiths. 

 

Craddock thought, "Here's a brother and sister brought up somewhere 

in Europe. Sonia Goedler was a rich woman at the time of her marriage, 

but money in Europe hasn't remained money. Queer things have 

happened to money during these war years. And so there are two 

young people, the son and daughter of a man who had a criminal record. 

Suppose they came to England, more or less penniless. What would 

they do? Find out about any rich relatives. Their uncle, a man of vast 

fortune is dead. Possibly the first thing they'd do would be to look up 

that uncle's will. See if by any chance money had been left to them or to 

their mother. They go to Somerset House and learn the contents of his 

will, and then, perhaps, they learn of the existence of Miss Letitia 

. Then they make inquiries about Randall Goedler's widow. 



She's an invalid, living up in Scotland, and they find out she hasn't long 

to live. If this Letitia  dies before her, they will come into a vast 

fortune. What then?"  

 

Craddock thought, "They wouldn't go to Scotland. They'd find out 

where Letitia is living now. And they'd go there - but not as 

themselves... They'd go together - or separately? Emma... I wonder?... 

Pip and Emma... I'll eat my hat if Pip, or Emma, or both of them, aren't in 

Chipping Cleghorn now..."  

 

 

 

Chapter 15 DELICIOUS DEATH 

 

In the kitchen at Little Paddocks, Miss Blacklog was giving instructions 

to Mitzi. 

 

"Sardine sandwiches as well as the tomato ones. And some of those 

little scones you make so nicely. And I'd like you to make that special 

cake of yours."  

 

"Is it a party then, that you want all these things?"  

 

"It's Miss Bunner's birthday, and some people will be coming to tea."  

 

"At her age one does not have birthdays. It is better to forget."  

 

"Well, she doesn't want to forget! Several people are bringing her 

presents - and it will be nice to make a little party of it."  



 

"That is what you say last time - and see what happened!"  

 

Miss Blacklog controlled her temper. 

 

"Well, it won't happen this time."  

 

"How do you know what may happen in this house? All day long I shiver 

and at night I lock my door and I look in the wardrobe to see no one is 

hidden there."  

 

"That ought to keep you nice and safe," said Miss Blacklog, coldly. 

 

"The cake that you want me to make, it is the -" 

 

Mitzi uttered a sound that to Miss Blacklog's English ear sounded like 

Schwitzebzr or alternatively like cats spitting at each other. 

 

"That's the one. The rich one." 

 

"Yes. It is rich. For it have I nothing! Impossible to make such a cake. I 

need for it chocolate and much butter, and sugar and raisins."  

 

"You can use this tin of butter that was sent us from America. And some 

of the raisins we were keeping for Christmas, and here is a slab of 

chocolate and a pound of sugar."  

 

Mitzi's face suddenly burst into radiant smiles. 

 



"So, I make him for you good - good," she cried, in an ecstasy. "It will be 

rich, rich, of a melting richness! And on top I will put the icing - 

chocolate icing - I make him so nice - and write on it Good Wishes. 

These English people with their cakes that tastes of sand, never never, 

will they have tasted such a cake. Delicious, they will say - delicious -" 

 

Her face clouded again. 

 

"Mr. Patrick. He called it Delicious Death. My cake! I will not have my 

cake called that!"  

 

"It was a compliment really," said Miss Blacklog. "He meant it was 

worth dying to eat such a cake."  

 

Mitzi looked at her doubtfully. 

 

"Well, I do not like that word - death. They are not dying because they 

eat my cake, no, they feel much much better..."  

 

"I'm sure we all shall."  

 

Miss Blacklog turned away and left the kitchen with a sigh of relief at 

the successful ending of the interview. 

 

With Mitzi one never knew. 

 

She ran into Dora Bunner outside. 

 

"Oh, Letty, shall I run in and tell Mitzi just how to cut the sandwiches?"  



 

"No," said Miss Blacklog, steering her friend firmly into the hall. "She's 

in a good mood now and I don't want her disturbed."  

 

"But I could just show her -" 

 

"Please don't show her anything, Dora. These central Europeans don't 

like being shown. They hate it."  

 

Dora looked at her doubtfully. Then she suddenly broke into smiles. 

 

"Edmund Swettenham just rang up. He wished me many happy returns 

of the day and said he was bringing me a pot of honey as a present this 

afternoon. Isn't it kind? I can't imagine how he knew it was my 

birthday."  

 

"Everybody seems to know. You must have been talking about it, Dora."  

 

"Well, I did just happen to mention that today I should be fifty-nine-" 

 

"You're sixty-four," said Miss Blacklog with a twinkle. 

 

"And Miss Hinchliffe said, 'You don't look it. What age do you think I 

am?' Which was rather awkward because Miss Hinchcliffe always looks 

so peculiar that she might be any age. She said she was bringing me 

some eggs, by the way. I said our hens hadn't been laying very well, 

lately."  

 



"We're not doing so badly out of your birthday," said Miss Blacklog. 

"Honey, eggs - a magnificent box of chocolates from Julia -" 

 

"I don't know where she gets such things."  

 

"Better not ask. Her methods are probably strictly illegal."  

 

"And your lovely brooch." Miss Bunner looked down proudly at her 

bosom on which was pinned a small diamond leaf. 

 

"Do you like it? I'm glad. I never cared for jewellery."  

 

"I love it."  

 

"Good. Let's go and feed the ducks."  

 

II 

 

"Ha," cried Patrick dramatically, as the party took their places round 

the dining-room table. "What do I see before me? Delicious Death."  

 

"Hush," said Miss Blacklog. "Don't let Mitzi hear you. She objects to 

your name for her cake very much."  

 

"Nevertheless, Delicious Death it is! Is it Bunny's birthday cake?"  

 

"Yes, it is," said Miss Bunner. "I really am having the most wonderful 

birthday."  

 



Her cheeks were flushed with excitement and had been ever since 

Colonel Easterbrook had handed her a small box of sweets and 

declaimed with a bow, "Sweets to the Sweet!"  

 

Julia had turned her head away hurriedly, and had been frowned at by 

Miss Blacklog. 

 

Full justice was done to the good things on the tea table and they rose 

from their seats after a round of crackers. 

 

"I feel slightly sick," said Julia. "It's that cake. I remember I felt just the 

same last time."  

 

"It's worth it," said Patrick. 

 

"These foreigners certainly understand confectionery," said Miss Hinch. 

"What they can't make is a plain boiled pudding."  

 

Everybody was respectfully silent, though it seemed to be hovering on 

Patrick's lips to ask if anyone really wanted a plain boiled pudding. 

 

"Got a new gardener?" asked Miss Hinchliffe of Miss Blacklog as they 

returned to the drawing-room. 

 

"No, why?"  

 

"Saw a man snooping round the hen-house. Quite a decent-looking 

Army type."  

 



"Oh, that," said Julia. "That's our detective."  

 

Mrs. Easterbrook dropped her handbag. 

 

"Detective?" she exclaimed. "But-but-why?"  

 

"I don't know," said Julia. "He prowls about and keeps an eye on the 

house. He's protecting Aunt Letty, I suppose."  

 

"Absolute nonsense," said Miss Blacklog. "I can protect myself, thank 

you."  

 

"But surely it's all over now," cried Mrs. Easterbrook. "Though I meant 

to ask you, why did they adjourn the inquest?"  

 

"Police aren't satisfied," said her husband. "That's what that means."  

 

"But aren't satisfied of what?"  

 

Colonel Easterbrook shook his head - with the air of a man who could 

say a good deal more if he chose. 

 

Edmund, who disliked the Colonel, said, "The truth of it is, we're all 

under suspicion."  

 

"But suspicion of what?" repeated Mrs. Easterbrook. 

 

"Never mind, kitten," said her husband. 

 



"Loitering with intent," said Edmund. "The intent being to commit 

murder upon the first opportunity."  

 

"Oh, don't, please don't, Mr. Swettenham." Dora Bunner began to cry. 

"I'm sure nobody here could possibly want to kill dear, dear Letty."  

 

There was a moment of horrible embarrassment. Edmund turned 

scarlet, murmured, "Just a joke." PhillipaHaymes suggested in a high clear 

voice that they might listen to the six o'clock news and the suggestion 

was received with enthusiastic assent. 

 

Patrick murmured to Julia: "We need Mrs. Harmon here. She'd be sure 

to say in that high clear voice of hers, 'But I suppose somebody is still 

waiting for a good chance to murder you, Miss Blacklog?'" 

 

"I'm glad she and that old Miss Marple couldn't come," said Julia. "That 

old woman is the prying kind. And a mind like a sink, I should think. Real 

Victorian type."  

 

Listening to the news led easily into a pleasant discussion on the 

horrors of atomic warfare. Colonel Easterbrook said that the real 

menace to civilization was undoubtedly Russia, and Edmund said that 

he had several charming Russian friends - which announcement was 

coldly received. 

 

The party broke up with renewed thanks to the hostess. 

 

"Enjoy yourself, Bunny?" asked Miss Blacklog, as the last guest was 

sped. 



 

"Oh, I did. But I've got a terrible headache. It's the excitement, I think."  

 

"It's the cake," said Patrick. "I feel a bit liverish myself. And you've been 

nibbling chocolates all the morning."  

 

"I'll go and lie down, I think," said Miss Bunner. "I'll take a couple of 

aspirins and try and have a nice sleep."  

 

"That would be a very good plan," said Miss Blacklog. 

 

Miss Bunner departed upstairs. 

 

"Shall I shut up the ducks for you, Aunt Letty?"  

 

Miss Blacklog looked at Patrick severely. 

 

"If you'll be sure to latch that door properly."  

 

"I will. I swear I will."  

 

"Have a glass of sherry, Aunt Letty," said Julia. "As my old nurse used 

to say, 'It will settle your stomach.' A revolting phrase - but curiously 

apposite at this moment."  

 

"Well, I dare say it might be a good thing. The truth is one isn't used to 

rich things. Oh, Bunny, how you made me jump. What is it?"  

 

"I can't find my aspirin," said Miss Bunner disconsolately. 



 

"Well, take some of mine, dear, they're by my bed."  

 

"There's a bottle on my dressing-table," said PhillipaHaymes. 

 

"Thank you - thank you very much. If I can't find mine - but I know I've 

got it somewhere. A new bottle. Now where could I have put it?"  

 

"There's heaps in the bathroom," said Julia impatiently. "This house is 

chock full of aspirin."  

 

"It vexes me to be so careless and mislay things," replied Miss Bunner, 

retreating up the stairs again. 

 

"Poor old Bunny," said Julia, holding up her glass. "Do you think we 

ought to have given her some sherry?"  

 

"Better not, I think," said Miss Blacklog. "She had a lot of excitement 

today, and it isn't really good for her. I'm afraid she'll be the worse for it 

tomorrow. Still, I really do think she has enjoyed herself!"  

 

"She's loved it," said PhillipaHaymes. 

 

"Let's give Mitzi a glass of sherry," suggested Julia. 

 

"Hi, Pat," she called as she heard him entering the side door, "fetch 

Mitzi."  

 

So Mitzi was brought in and Julia poured her out a glass of sherry. 



 

"Here's to the best cook in the world," said Patrick. 

 

Mitzi was gratified - but felt nevertheless that a protest was due. 

 

"That is not so. I am not really a cook. In my country I do intellectual 

work."  

 

"Then you're wasted," said Patrick. "What's intellectual work compared 

to a chef d'oeuvre like Delicious Death?"  

 

"Oo - I say to you I do not like -" 

 

"Never mind what you like, my girl," said Patrick. "That's my name for it 

and here's to it. Let's all drink to Delicious Death and to hell with the 

aftereffects."  

 

III 

 

"PhillipaHaymes, my dear, I want to talk to you."  

 

"Yes, Miss Blacklog?"  

 

 PhillipaHaymes looked up in slight surprise. 

 

"You're not worrying about anything, are you?"  

 

"Worrying?"  

 



"I've noticed that you've looked worried lately. There isn't anything 

wrong, is there?"  

 

"Oh no, Miss Blacklog. What should there be?"  

 

"Well - I wondered. I thought, perhaps, that you and Patrick?"  

 

"Patrick?" PhillipaHaymes looked really surprised. 

 

"It's not so, then. Please forgive me if I've been impertinent. But you've 

been thrown together a lot and although Patrick is my cousin, I don't 

think he's the type to make a satisfactory husband. Not for some time to 

come, at all events."  

 

PhillipaHaymes's face had frozen into a hard immobility. 

 

"I shan't marry again," she said. 

 

"Oh, yes, you will someday, my child. You're young. But we needn't 

discuss that. There's no other trouble? You're not worried about - 

money, for instance?"  

 

"No, I'm quite all right."  

 

"I know you get anxious sometimes about your boy's education. That's 

why I want to tell you something. I drove into Milchester this afternoon 

to see Mr. Beddingfeld, my lawyer. Things haven't been very settled 

lately and I thought I would like to make a new will - in view of certain 



eventualities. Apart from Bunny's legacy, everything goes to you, 

PhillipaHaymes."  

 

"What?" PhillipaHaymes spun round. Her eyes stared. She looked dismayed, 

almost frightened. 

 

"But I don't want it - really I don't... Oh, I'd rather not... And anyway, 

why? Why to me?"  

 

"Perhaps," said Miss Blacklog in a peculiar voice, "because there's no 

one else."  

 

"But there's Patrick and Julia."  

 

"Yes, there's Patrick and Julia." The odd note in Miss Blacklog's voice 

was still there. 

 

"They are your relations."  

 

"Very distant ones. They have no claim on me."  

 

"But I - I haven't either - I don't know what you think... Oh, I don't want 

it."  

 

Her gaze held more hostility than gratitude. There was something 

almost like fear in her manner. 

 



"I know what I'm doing, PhillipaHaymes. I've become fond of you - and there's 

the - boy... You won't get very much if I should die now - but in a few 

weeks' time it might be different."  

 

Her eyes met PhillipaHaymes's steadily. 

 

"But you're not going to die!" PhillipaHaymes protested. 

 

"Not if I can avoid it by taking due precautions."  

 

"Precautions?"  

 

"Yes. Think it over... And don't worry any more."  

 

She left the room abruptly. PhillipaHaymes heard her speaking to Julia in the 

hall. 

 

Julia entered the drawing-room a few moments later. There was a 

slightly steely glitter in her eyes. 

 

"Played your cards rather well, haven't you, PhillipaHaymes? I see you're one of 

those quiet ones... a dark horse."  

 

"So you heard -" 

 

"Yes, I heard. I rather think I was meant to hear."  

 

"What do you mean?"  

 



"Our Letty's no fool... Well, anyway, you're all right, PhillipaHaymes. Sitting 

pretty, aren't you?"  

 

"Oh, Julia - I didn't mean - I never meant -" 

 

"Didn't you? Of course you did. You're fairly up against things, aren't 

you? Hard up for money. But just remember this - if anyone bumps off 

Aunt Letty now, you'll be suspect No.1."  

 

"But I shan't be. It would be idiotic if I killed her now when - if I waited -" 

 

"So you do know about old Mrs. What's-her-name dying up in Scotland? 

I wondered... PhillipaHaymes, I'm beginning to believe you're a very dark horse 

indeed."  

 

"I don't want to do you and Patrick out of anything."  

 

"Don't you, my dear? I'm sorry - but I don't believe you." 

 

Chapter 16 INSPECTOR CRADDOCK RETURNS 

 

Inspector Craddock had had a bad night on his night journey home. His 

dreams had been less dreams than nightmares. Again and again he 

was racing through the grey corridors of an old-world castle in a 

desperate attempt to get somewhere, or to prevent something, in time. 

Finally he dreamt that he awoke. An enormous relief surged over him. 

Then the door of his compartment slid slowly open, and Blacklog 

looked in at him with blood running down her face, and said 

reproachfully: 



 

"Why didn't you save me? You could have if you'd tried." 

 

This time he really awoke. 

 

Altogether, the inspector was thankful finally to reach Milchester. He 

went straight away to make his report to Rydesdale who listened 

carefully. 

 

"It doesn't take us much further," he said. "But it confirms what Miss 

Blacklog told you. Pip and Emma - h'm, I wonder."  

 

"Patrick and Julia Simmons are the right age, sir. If we could establish 

that Miss Blacklog hadn't seen them since they were children -" 

 

With a very faint chuckle, Rydesdale said: "Our ally, Miss Marple, has 

established that for us. Actually Miss Blacklog had never seen either of 

them at all until two months ago."  

 

"Then, surely, sir -" 

 

"It's not so easy as all that, Craddock. We've been checking up. On 

what we've got, Patrick and Julia seem definitely to be out of it. His 

Naval record is genuine -  quite a good record bar a tendency to 

'insubordination.' We've checked with Cannes, and an indignant Mrs. 

Simmons says of course her son and daughter are at Chipping 

Cleghorn with her cousin  Blacklog. So that's that!"  

 

"And Mrs. Simmons is Mrs. Simmons?"  



 

"She's been Mrs. Simmons for a very long time, that's all I can say," said 

Rydesdale dryly. 

 

"That seems clear enough. Only - those two fitted. Right age. Not 

known to Miss Blacklog, personally. If we wanted Pip and Emma - well, 

there they were."  

 

The Chief Constable nodded thoughtfully, then he pushed across a 

paper to Craddock. 

 

"Here's a little something we've dug up on Mrs. Easterbrook."  

 

The Inspector read with lifted eyebrows. 

 

"Very interesting," he remarked. "Hoodwinked that old ass pretty well, 

hasn't she? It doesn't tie in with this business though, as far as I can 

see."  

 

"Apparently not."  

 

"And here's an item that concerns PhillipaHaymes."  

 

Again Craddock's eyebrows rose. 

 

"I think I'll have another talk with the lady," he said. "You think this 

information might be relevant?"  

 

"I think it might be. It would be a long shot, of course..."  



 

The two men were silent for a moment or two. 

 

"How has Fletcher got on, sir?"  

 

"Fletcher has been exceedingly active. He's made a routine search of 

the house by agreement with Miss Blacklog - but he didn't find anything 

significant. Then he's been checking up on who could have had the 

opportunity of oiling that door. Checking who was up at the house on 

the days that that foreign girl was out. A little more complicated than 

we thought, because it appears she goes for a walk most afternoons. 

Usually down to the village where she has a cup of coffee at the 

Bluebird. So that when Miss Blacklog and Miss Bunner are out - which 

is most afternoons - they go blackberrying - the coast is clear."  

 

"And the doors are always left unlocked?"  

 

"They used to be. I don't suppose they are now."  

 

"What are Fletcher's results? Who's known to have been in the house 

when it was left empty?"  

 

"Practically the whole lot of them."  

 

Rydesdale consulted a page in front of him. 

 

"Miss Murgatroyd was there with a hen to sit on some eggs. (Sounds 

complicated but that's what she says.) Very flustered about it all and 



contradicts herself, but Fletcher thinks that's temperamental and not a 

sign of guilt."  

 

"Might be," Craddock admitted. "She flaps."  

 

"Then Mrs. Swettenham came up to fetch some horse meat that Miss 

Blacklog had left for her on the kitchen table, because Miss Blacklog 

had been in to Milchester in the car that day and always gets Mrs. 

Swettenham's horse meat for her. That makes sense to you?"  

 

Craddock considered. 

 

"Why didn't Miss Blacklog leave the horse meat when she passed Mrs. 

Swettenham's house on her way back from Milchester?"  

 

"I don't know, but she didn't. Mrs. Swettenham says she (Miss B.) 

always leaves it on the kitchen table, and she (Mrs. S.) likes to fetch it 

when Mitzi isn't there because Mitzi is sometimes so rude."  

 

"Hangs together quite well. And the next?"  

 

"Miss Hinchliffe. Says she wasn't there at all lately. But she was. 

Because Mitzi saw her coming out of the side door one day and so did a 

Mrs. Butt (she's one of the locals). Miss H. then admitted she might have 

been there but had forgotten. Can't remember what she went for. Says 

she probably just dropped in."  

 

"That's rather odd."  

 



"So was her manner, apparently. Then there's Mrs. Easterbrook. She 

was exercising the dear dogs out that way and she just popped in to 

see if Miss Blacklog would lend her a knitting pattern but Miss Blacklog 

wasn't in. She says she waited a little."  

 

"Just so. Might be snooping round. Or might be oiling a door. And the 

Colonel?"  

 

"Went there one day with a book on India that Miss Blacklog had 

expressed a desire to read."  

 

"Had she?"  

 

"Her account is that she tried to get out of having to read it, but it was 

no use."  

 

"And that's fair enough," sighed Craddock. "If anyone is really 

determined to lend you a book, you never can get out of it!"  

 

"We don't know if Edmund Swettenham was up there. He's extremely 

vague. Said he did drop in occasionally on errands for his mother, but 

thinks not lately."  

 

"In fact, it's all inconclusive."  

 

"Yes."  

 

Rydesdale said, with a slight grin: "Miss Marple has also been active. 

Fletcher reports that she had morning coffee at the Bluebird. She's 



been to sherry at Boulders, and to tea at Little Paddocks. She's 

admired Mrs. Swettenham's garden - and dropped in to see Colonel 

Easterbrook's Indian curios."  

 

"She may be able to tell us if Colonel Easterbrook's a pukka Colonel or 

not."  

 

"She'd know, I agree - he seems all right. We'd have to check with the 

Far Eastern Authorities to get certain identification."  

 

"And in the meantime " - Craddock broke off - "do you think Miss 

Blacklog would consent to go away?"  

 

"Go away from Chipping Cleghorn?"  

 

"Yes. Take the faithful Bunner with her, perhaps, and leave for an 

unknown destination. Why shouldn't she go up to Scotland and stay 

with Belle Goedler. It's a pretty unget-at-able place."  

 

"Stop there and wait for her to die? I don't think she'd do that. I don't 

think any nice-natured woman would like that suggestion."  

 

"If it's a matter of saving her life -" 

 

"Come now, Craddock, it isn't quite so easy to bump someone off as 

you seem to think."  

 

"Isn't it, sir?"  

 



"Well - in one way - it's easy enough I agree. Plenty of methods. Weed-

killer. A bash on the head when she's out shutting up the poultry, a pot 

shot from behind a hedge. All quite simple. But to bump someone off 

and not be suspected of bumping them off - that's not quite so easy. 

And they must realise by now that they're all under observation. The 

original carefully planned scheme failed. Our unknown murderer has 

got to think up something else."  

 

"I know that, sir. But there's the time element to consider. Mrs. 

Goedler's a dying woman - she might pop off any minute. That means 

that our murderer can't afford to wait."  

 

"True."  

 

"And another thing, sir. He - or she - must know that we're checking up 

on everybody."  

 

"And that takes time," said Rydesdale with a sigh. "It means checking 

with the East, with India. Yes, it's a long tedious business."  

 

"So that's another reason for hurry. I'm sure, sir, that the danger is very 

real. It's a very large sum that's at stake. If Belle Goedler dies -" 

 

He broke off as a constable entered. 

 

"Constable Legg on the line from Chipping Cleghorn, sir."  

 

"Put him through here."  

 



Inspector Craddock, watching the Chief Constable, saw his features 

harden and stiffen. 

 

"Very good," barked Rydesdale. "Detective-Inspector Craddock will be 

coming out immediately."  

 

He put the receiver down. 

 

"Is it -" Craddock broke off. 

 

Rydesdale shook his head. 

 

"No," he said. "It's Dora Bunner. She wanted some aspirin. Apparently 

she took some from a bottle beside Blacklog's bed. There were 

only a few tablets left in the bottle. She took two and left one. The 

doctor's got that one and is sending it to be analysed. He says it's 

definitely not aspirin."  

 

"She's dead?"  

 

"Yes, found dead in her bed this morning. Died in her sleep, doctor says. 

He doesn't think it was natural though her health was in a bad state. 

Narcotic poisoning, that's his guess. Autopsy's fixed for tonight."  

 

"Aspirin tablets by Blacklog's bed. The clever clever devil. 

Patrick told me Miss Blacklog threw away a half bottle of sherry - 

opened a new one. I don't suppose she'd have thought of doing that 

with an open bottle of aspirin. Who had been in the house this time - 

within the last day or two? The tablets can't have been there long."  



 

Rydesdale looked at him. 

 

"All our lot were there yesterday," he said. "Birthday party for Miss 

Bunner. Any of them could have nipped upstairs and done a neat little 

substitution. Or of course anyone living in the house could have done it 

any time."  

 

Chapter 17 THE ALBUM 

 

Standing by the Vicarage gate, well wrapped up, Miss Marple took the 

note from Bunch's hand. 

 

"Tell Miss Blacklog," said Bunch, "that Julian is terribly sorry he can't 

come up himself. He's got a parishioner dying out at Locke Hamlet. He'll 

come up after lunch if Miss Blacklog would like to see him. The note's 

about the arrangements for the funeral. He suggests Wednesday if the 

inquest's on Tuesday. Poor old Bunny. It's so typical of her, somehow, 

to get hold of poisoned aspirin meant for someone else. Goodbye, 

darling. I hope the walk won't be too much for you. But I've simply got to 

get that child to the hospital at once."  

 

Miss Marple said the walk wouldn't be too much for her, and Bunch 

rushed off. 

 

Whilst waiting for Miss Blacklog, Miss Marple looked round the drawing-

room, and wondered just exactly what Dora Bunner had meant that 

morning in the Bluebird by saying that she believed Patrick had 



"tampered with the lamp" to "make the lights go out." What lamp? And 

how had he "tampered" with it? 

 

She must, Miss Marple decided, have meant the small lamp that stood 

on the table by the archway. She had said something about a 

shepherdess or a shepherd - and this was actually a delicate piece of 

Dresden china, a shepherd in a blue coat and pink breeches holding 

what had originally been a candlestick and had now been adapted to 

electricity. The shade was of plain vellum and a little too big so that it 

almost masked the figure. 

 

What else was it that Dora Bunner had said? "I remember distinctly that 

it was the shepherdess. And the next day -" Certainly it was a shepherd 

now. 

 

Miss Marple remembered that when she and Bunch had come to tea, 

Dora Bunner had said something about the lamp being one of a pair. Of 

course - a shepherd and a shepherdess. And it had been the 

shepherdess on the day of the hold-up - and the next morning it had 

been the other lamp - the lamp that was here now, the shepherd. The 

lamps had been changed over during the night. And Dora Bunner had 

had reason to believe (or had believed without reason) that it was 

Patrick who had changed them. 

 

Why? Because, if the original lamp were examined, it would show just 

how Patrick had managed to "make the lights go out." How had he 

managed? Miss Marple looked earnestly at the lamp in front of her. The 

flex ran along the table over the edge and was plugged into the wall. 

There was a small pear-shaped switch halfway along the flex. None of it 



suggested anything to Miss Marple because she knew very little about 

electricity. 

 

Where was the shepherdess lamp? she wondered. In the "spare room 

"or thrown away, or - where was it Dora Bunner had come upon Patrick 

Simmons with a feather and an oily cup? In the shrubbery? Miss Marple 

made up her mind to put all these points to Inspector Craddock. 

 

At the very beginning Miss Blacklog had leaped to the conclusion that 

her nephew Patrick had been behind the insertion of that advertisement. 

That kind of instinctive belief was often justified, or so Miss Marple 

believed. Because, if you knew people fairly well, you knew the kind of 

things they thought of... 

 

Patrick Simmons... 

 

A handsome young man. An engaging young man. A young man whom 

women liked, both young women and old women. The kind of man, 

perhaps, that Randall Goedler's sister had married. Could Patrick 

Simmons be 'Pip'? But he'd been in the Navy during the war. The police 

could soon check up on that. 

 

Only - sometimes - the most amazing impersonations did happen. 

 

You could get away with a great deal if you had enough audacity... 

 

The door opened and Miss Blacklog came in. She looked, Miss Marple 

thought, many years older. All the life and energy had gone out of her. 

 



"I'm very sorry, disturbing you like this," said Miss Marple. "But the 

Vicar had a dying parishioner and Bunch had to rush a sick child to 

hospital. The Vicar wrote you a note."  

 

She held it out and Miss Blacklog took it and opened it. 

 

"Do sit down, Miss Marple," she said. "It's very kind of you to have 

brought this."  

 

She read the note through. 

 

"The Vicar's a very understanding man," she said quietly. "He doesn't 

offer one fatuous consolation... Tell him that these arrangements will do 

very well. Her - her favourite hymn was Lead Kindly Light."  

 

Her voice broke suddenly. 

 

Miss Marple said gently: "I am only a stranger, but I am so very very 

sorry."  

 

And suddenly, uncontrollably, Blacklog wept. It was a piteous 

overmastering grief, with a kind of hopelessness about it. Miss Marple 

sat quite still. Miss Blacklog sat up at last. Her face was swollen and 

blotched with tears. 

 

"I'm sorry," she said. "It - it just came over me. What I've lost. She - she 

was the only link with the past, you see. The only one who - who 

remembered. Now that she's gone I'm quite alone."  

 



"I know what you mean," said Miss Marple. "One is alone when the last 

one who remembers is gone. I have nephews and nieces and kind 

friends - but there's no one who knew me as a young girl - no one who 

belongs to the old days. I've been alone for quite a long time now."  

 

Both women sat silent for some moments. 

 

"You understand very well," said Blacklog. She rose and went 

over to her desk. "I must write a few words to the Vicar." She held the 

pen rather awkwardly and wrote slowly. 

 

"Arthritic," she explained. "Sometimes I can hardly write at all."  

 

She sealed up the envelope and addressed it. 

 

"If you wouldn't mind taking it, it would be very kind."  

 

Hearing a man's voice in the hall she said quickly: "That's Inspector 

Craddock."  

 

She went to the mirror over the fireplace and applied a small powder 

puff to her face. 

 

Craddock came in with a grim, angry face. 

 

He looked at Miss Marple with disapprobation. 

 

"Oh," he said. "So you're here."  

 



Miss Blacklog turned from the mantelpiece. 

 

"Miss Marple kindly came up with a note from the Vicar."  

 

Miss Marple said in a flurried manner: 

 

"I am going at once - at once. Please don't let me hamper you in any 

way."  

 

"Were you at the tea party here yesterday afternoon?"  

 

Miss Marple said, nervously: "No - no, I wasn't. Bunch drove me over to 

call on some friends."  

 

"Then there's nothing you can tell me." Craddock held the door open in 

a pointed manner, and Miss Marple scuttled out in a somewhat abashed 

fashion. 

 

"Nosey Parkers, these old women," said Craddock. 

 

"I think you're being unfair to her," said Miss Blacklog. "She really did 

come with a note from the Vicar."  

 

"I bet she did."  

 

"I don't think it was idle curiosity."  

 

"Well, perhaps you're right, Miss Blacklog, but my own diagnosis would 

be a severe attack of Nosey Parkeritis..."  



 

"She's a very harmless old creature," said Miss Blacklog. "Dangerous 

as a rattlesnake if you only knew," the Inspector thought grimly. But he 

had no intention of taking anyone into his confidence unnecessarily. 

Now that he knew definitely there was a killer at large, he felt that the 

less said the better. He didn't want the next person bumped off to be 

 Marple. 

 

Somewhere - a killer... Where? 

 

"I won't waste time offering sympathy, Miss Blacklog," he said. "As a 

matter of fact I feel pretty bad about Miss Bunner's death. We ought to 

have been able to prevent it."  

 

"I don't see what you could have done."  

 

"No - well, it wouldn't have been easy. But now we've got to work fast. 

Who's doing this, Miss Blacklog? Who's had two shots at killing you, and 

will probably, if we don't work fast enough, soon have another?"  

 

 Blacklog shivered. "I don't know, Inspector - I don't know at all!" 

 

"I've checked up with Mrs. Goedler. She's given me all the help she can. 

It wasn't very much. There are just a few people who would definitely 

profit by your death. First Pip and Emma. Patrick and Julia Simmons 

are the right age, but their background seems clear enough. Anyway, 

we can't concentrate on these two alone. Tell me, Miss Blacklog, would 

you recognise Sonia Goedler if you saw her?"  

 



"Recognise Sonia? Why, of course -" she stopped suddenly. "No," she 

said slowly, "I don't know that I would. It's a long time. Thirty years... 

She'd be an elderly woman now."  

 

"What was she like when you remember her?"  

 

"Sonia?" Miss Blacklog considered for some moments. "She was rather 

small, dark..."  

 

"Any special peculiarities? Mannerisms?"  

 

"No - no, I don't think so. She was gay - very gay."  

 

"She mayn't be so gay now," said the Inspector. "Have you got a 

photograph of her?"  

 

"Of Sonia? Let me see - not a proper photograph. I've got some old 

snapshots - in an album somewhere - at least I think there's one of her."  

 

"Ah. Can I have a look at it?"  

 

"Yes, of course. Now where did I put that album?"  

 

"Tell me, Miss Blacklog, do you consider it remotely passible that Mrs. 

Swettenham might be Sonia Goedler?"  

 

"Mrs. Swettenham?" Miss Blacklog looked at him in lively astonishment. 

"But her husband was in the Government Service - in India first, I think, 

and then in Hong Kong."  



 

"What you mean is, that that's the story she's told you. You don't, as we 

say in the Courts, know it of your own knowledge, do you?"  

 

"No," said Miss Blacklog slowly. "When you put it like that, I don't... But 

Mrs. Swettenham? Oh, it's absurd!"  

 

"Did Sonia Goedler ever do any acting? Amateur theatricals?"  

 

"Oh, yes. She was good."  

 

"There you are! Another thing, Mrs. Swettenham wears a wig. At least," 

the Inspector corrected himself, "Mrs. Harmon says she does."  

 

"Yes - yes, I suppose it might be a wig. All those little grey curls. But I 

still think it's absurd. She's really very nice and exceedingly funny 

sometimes."  

 

"Then there's Miss Hinchliffe and Miss Murgatroyd. Could either of them 

be Sonia Goedler?"  

 

"Miss Hinchliffe is too tall. She's as tall as a man."  

 

"Miss Murgatroyd then?"  

 

"Oh, but - oh, no, I'm sure Miss Murgatroyd couldn't be Sonia."  

 

"You don't see very well, do you, Miss Blacklog?"  

 



"I'm short-sighted, is that what you mean?"  

 

"Yes. What I'd like to see is a snapshot of this Sonia Goedler, even if it's 

a long time ago and not a good likeness. We're trained, you know, to 

pick out resemblances, in a way no amateur can ever do."  

 

"I'll try and find it for you."  

 

"Now?"  

 

"What, at once?" 

 

"I'd prefer it" 

 

"Very well. Now, let me see. I saw that album when we were tidying a lot 

of books out of the cupboard. Julia was helping me. She laughed, I 

remember, at the clothes we used to wear in those days... The books 

we put in the shelf in the drawing-room. Where did we put the albums 

and the big bound volumes of the Art Journal? What a wretched 

memory I have! Perhaps Julia will remember. She's at home today."  

 

"I'll find her."  

 

The Inspector departed on his quest. He did not find Julia in any of the 

downstairs rooms. Mitzi, asked where Miss Simmons was, said crossly 

that it was not her affair. 

 

"Me! I stay in my kitchen and concern myself with the lunch. And 

nothing do I eat that I have not cooked myself. Nothing, do you hear?"  



 

The Inspector called up the stair "Miss Simmons," and getting no 

response, went up. 

 

He met Julia face to face just as he turned the corner of the landing. 

She had just emerged from a door that showed behind it a small twisty 

staircase. 

 

"I was up in the attic," she explained. "What is it?"  

 

Inspector Craddock explained. 

 

"Those old photograph albums? Yes, I remember them quite well. We 

put them in the big cupboard in the study, I think. I'll find them for you."  

 

She led the way downstairs and pushed open the study door. Near the 

window there was a large cupboard. Julia pulled it open and disclosed 

a heterogeneous mass of objects. 

 

"Junk," said Julia. "All junk. But elderly people simply will not throw 

things away."  

 

The Inspector knelt down and took a couple of old-fashioned albums 

from the bottom shelf. 

 

"Are these they?"  

 

"Yes."  

 



Miss Blacklog came in and joined them. 

 

"Oh, so that's where we put them. I couldn't remember."  

 

Craddock had the books on the table and was turning the pages. 

 

Women in large cartwheel hats, women with dresses tapering down to 

their feet so that they could hardly walk. The photos had captions 

neatly printed underneath them, but the ink was old and faded. 

 

"It would be in this one," said Miss Blacklog. "On about the second or 

third page. The other book is after Sonia had married and gone away." 

She turned a page. 

 

"It ought to be here." She stopped. 

 

There were several empty spaces on the page. Craddock bent down 

and deciphered the faded writing. 

 

"Sonia... Self... R.G." A little farther along, "Sonia and Belle on beach." 

And again on the opposite page, "Picnic at Skeyne." He turned over 

another page, "Blacklog, Self, Sonia. R.G."  

 

Craddock stood up. His lips were grim. 

 

"Somebody has removed these photographs - not long ago, I should 

say."  

 



"There weren't any blank spaces when we looked at them the other day. 

Were there, Julia?"  

 

"I didn't look very closely - only at some of the dresses. But no... you're 

right, Aunt Letty, there weren't any blank spaces."  

 

Craddock looked grimmer still. 

 

"Somebody," he said, "has removed every photo of Sonia Goedler from 

this album." 

 

Chapter 18 THE LETTERS 

 

"Sorry to worry you again,PhillipaHaymes."  

 

"It doesn't matter," said PhillipaHaymes coldly. "Shall we go into this room 

here?"  

 

"The study? Yes, if you like, Inspector. It's very cold. There's no fire."  

 

"It doesn't matter. It's not for long. And we're not so likely to be 

overheard here."  

 

"Does that matter?"  

 

"Not to me, PhillipaHaymes. It might to you."  

 

"What do you mean?"  

 



"I think you told me, PhillipaHaymes, that your husband was killed fighting 

in Italy?"  

 

"Well?"  

 

"Wouldn't it have been simpler to have told me the truth - that he was a 

deserter from his regiment."  

 

He saw her face grow white, and her hands close and unclose 

themselves. 

 

She said bitterly: "Do you have to rake up everything?" 

 

Craddock said dryly: "We expect people to tell us the truth about 

themselves."  

 

She was silent. Then she said: "Well?"  

 

"What do you mean by 'Well?', PhillipaHaymes?"  

 

"I mean, what are you going to do about it? Tell everybody? Is that 

necessary - or fair - or kind?"  

 

"Does nobody know?"  

 

"Nobody here. Harry -" her voice changed - "my son, he doesn't know. I 

don't want him to know. I don't want him to know - ever."  

 



"Then let me tell you that you're taking a very big risk, PhillipaHaymes. 

When the boy is old enough to understand, tell him the truth. If he finds 

out by himself some day - it won't be good for him. If you go on stuffing 

him up with tales of his father dying like a hero -" 

 

"I don't do that. I'm not completely dishonest. I just don't talk about it. 

His father was - killed in the war. After all, that's what it amounts to - for 

us."  

 

"But your husband is still alive?"  

 

"Perhaps. How should I know?"  

 

"When did you see him last,  PhillipaHaymes?"  

 

PhillipaHaymes said quickly: "I haven't seen him for years."  

 

"Are you quite sure that's true? You didn't, for instance, see him about a 

fortnight ago?"  

 

"What are you suggesting?" 

 

"It never seemed to me very likely that you met Rudi Scherz in the 

summerhouse here. But Mitzi's story was very emphatic. I suggest, 

PhillipaHaymes, that the man you came back from work to meet that morning 

was your husband."  

 

"I didn't meet anybody in the summerhouse."  

 



"He was hard up for money, perhaps, and you supplied him with 

some?"  

 

"I've not seen him, I tell you. I didn't meet anybody in the 

summerhouse."  

 

"Deserters are often rather desperate men. They often take part in 

robberies, you know. Hold-ups. Things of that kind. And they have 

foreign revolvers very often that they've brought back from abroad." 

 

"I don't know where my husband is. I haven't seen him for years."  

 

"Is that your last word, PhillipaHaymes?"  

 

"I've nothing else to say."  

 

II 

 

Craddock came away from his interview with  PhillipaHaymes feeling 

angry and baffled. 

 

"Obstinate as a mule," he said to himself angrily. He was fairly sure that 

PhillipaHaymes was lying, but he hadn't succeeded in breaking down her 

obstinate denials. 

 

He wished he knew a little more about ex-Captain Haymes. His 

information was meagre. An unsatisfactory Army record, but nothing to 

suggest that PhillipaHaymes was likely to turn criminal. 

 



And anyway PhillipaHaymes didn't fit in with the oiled door. 

 

Someone in the house had done that, or someone with easy access to it. 

 

He stood looking up the staircase, and suddenly he wondered what 

Julia had been doing up in the attic. An attic, he thought, was an 

unlikely place for the fastidious Julia to visit. 

 

What had she been doing up there? 

 

He ran lightly up to the first floor. There was no one about. He opened 

the door out of which Julia had come and went up the narrow stairs to 

the attic. 

 

There were trunks there, old suitcases, various broken articles of 

furniture, a chair with a leg off, a broken china lamp, part of an old 

dinner service. 

 

He turned to the trunks and opened the lid of one. Clothes. Old-

fashioned, quite good quality women's clothes. Clothes belonging, he 

supposed, to Miss Blacklog, or to her sister who had died. 

 

He opened another trunk. 

 

Curtains. 

 

He passed to a small attaché-case. It had papers in it and letters. Very 

old letters, yellowed with time. 

 



He looked at the outside of the case which had the initials C.L.B. on it. 

He deduced correctly that it had belonged to Letitia's sister Blacklog. 

He unfolded one of the letters. It began: 

 

Dearest Blacklog, 

 

Yesterday Belle felt well enough to go for a picnic. R.G. also took a day 

off. The Asuogel flotation has gone splendidly; R.G. is terribly pleased 

about it. The Preference shares are at a premium. 

 

He skipped the rest and looked at the signature: 

 

Your loving sister,  

 

Letitia. 

 

He picked up another. 

 

Darling Blacklog,  

 

I wish you would sometimes make up your mind to see people. You do 

exaggerate, you know. It isn't nearly as bad as you think. And people 

really don't mind things like that. It's not the disfigurement you think it is. 

 

He nodded his head. He remembered Belle Goedler saying that 

Blacklog had a disfigurement or deformity of some kind. 

Letitia had, in the end, resigned her job, to go and look after her sister. 

These letters all breathed the anxious spirit of her affection and love for 

an invalid. She had written her sister, apparently, long accounts of 



everyday happenings, of any little detail that she thought might interest 

the sick girl. And Blacklog had kept these letters. Occasionally odd 

snapshots had been enclosed. 

 

Excitement suddenly flooded Craddock's mind. Here, it might be, he 

would find a clue. In these letters there would be written down things 

that Blacklog herself had long forgotten. Here was a faithful 

picture of the past and somewhere amongst it, there might be a clue 

that would help him to identify the unknown. 

 

Photographs, too. There might, just possibly, be a photograph of Sonia 

Goedler here that the person who had taken the other photos out of the 

album did not know about. 

 

Inspector Craddock packed the letters up again, carefully, closed the 

case, and started down the stairs. Blacklog, standing on the 

landing below, looked at him in amazement. 

 

"Was that you up in the attic? I heard footsteps. I couldn't imagine who -

" 

 

"Miss Blacklog, I have found some letters here, written by you to your 

sister Blacklog many years ago. Will you allow me to take them away 

and read them?"  

 

She flushed angrily. 

 

"Must you do a thing like that? Why? What good can they be to you?"  

 



"They might give me a picture of Sonia Goedler, of her character - there 

may be some allusion - some incident - that will help."  

 

"They are private letters, Inspector."  

 

"I know."  

 

"I suppose you will take them anyway... You have the power to do so, I 

suppose, or you can easily get it. Take them - take them! But you'll find 

very little about Sonia. She married and went away only a year or two 

after I began to work for Randall Goedler."  

 

Craddock said obstinately: "There may be something -" He added, 

"We've got to try everything. I assure you the danger is very real."  

 

She said, biting her lips: "I know. Bunny is dead - from taking an aspirin 

tablet that was meant for me. It may be Patrick, or Julia, or PhillipaHaymes, or 

Mitzi next - somebody young with their life in front of them. Somebody 

who drinks a glass of wine that is poured out for me, or eats a chocolate 

that is sent to me. Oh! take the letters - take them away. And afterwards 

burn them. They don't mean anything to anyone but me and Blacklog. 

It's all over - gone - past. Nobody remembers now..."  

 

Her hand went up to the choker of false pearls she was wearing. 

Craddock thought how incongruous it looked with her tweed coat and 

skirt. 

 

She said again: "Take the letters."  

 



III 

 

It was the following afternoon that the Inspector called at the Vicarage. 

 

It was a dark, gusty day... Miss Marple had her chair pulled close to the 

fire and was knitting. Bunch was on hands and knees, crawling about 

the floor, cutting out material to a pattern. 

 

She sat back and pushed a mop of hair out of her eyes, looking up 

expectantly at Craddock. 

 

"I don't know if it's a breach of confidence," said the Inspector, 

addressing himself to Miss Marple, "but I'd like you to look at this 

letter."  

 

He explained the circumstances of his discovery in the attic. 

 

"It's rather a touching collection of letters," he said. "Miss Blacklog 

poured out everything in the hopes of sustaining her sister's interest in 

life and keeping her health good. There's a very clear picture of an old 

father in the background - old Dr.. A real old pig-headed bully, 

absolutely set in his ways, and convinced that everything he thought 

and said was right. Probably killed thousands of patients through 

obstinacy. He wouldn't stand for any new ideas or methods."  

 

"I don't really know that I blame him there," said Miss Marple. "I always 

feel that the young doctors are only too anxious to experiment. After 

they've whipped out all our teeth, and administered quantities of very 

peculiar glands, and removed bits of our insides, they then confess that 



nothing can be done for us. I really prefer the old-fashioned remedy of 

big black bottles of medicine. After all, one can always pour those down 

the sink."  

 

She took the letter that Craddock handed her. 

 

He said: "I want you to read it because I think that that generation is 

more easily understood by you than by me. I don't know really quite 

how these people's minds worked."  

 

Miss Marple unfolded the fragile paper. 

 

Dearest Blacklog, 

 

I've not written for two days because we've been having the most 

terrible domestic complications. Randall's sister Sonia (you remember 

her? She came to take you out in the car that day? How I wish you 

would go out more), Sonia has declared her intention of marrying one, 

Dmitri Stamfordis. I have only seen him once. Very attractive - not to be 

trusted, I should say. R.G. raves against him and says he is a crook and 

a swindler. Belle, bless her, just smiles and lies on her sofa. Sonia, who 

though she looks so impassive has really a terrific temper, is simply 

wild with R.G. I really thought yesterday she was going to murder him! 

 

I've done my best. I've talked to Sonia and I've talked to R.G. and I've 

got them both into a more reasonable frame of mind and then they 

come together and it all starts over again! You've no idea how tiring it is. 

R.G. has been making enquiries -  and it does really seem as though this 

Stamfordis man was thoroughly undesirable. 



 

In the meantime business is being neglected. I carry on at the office and 

in a way it's rather fun because R.G. gives me a free hand. He said to 

me yesterday: "Thank Heaven, there's one sane person in the world. 

You're never likely to fall in love with a crook, Blackie, are you?" I said I 

didn't think I was likely to fall in love with anybody. R.G. said: "Let's 

start a few new hares in the City." He's really rather a mischievous devil 

sometimes and he sails terribly near the wind. "You're quite determined 

to keep me on the straight and narrow path aren't you, Blackie?" he 

said the other day. And I shall too! I can't understand how people can't 

see when a thing's dishonest - but R.G. really and truly doesn't. He only 

knows what is actually against the law. 

 

Belle only laughs at all this. She thinks the fuss about Sonia is all 

nonsense. "Sonia has her own money," she said. "Why shouldn't she 

marry this man if she wants to?" I said it might turn out to be a terrible 

mistake and Belle said, "It's never a mistake to marry a man you want to 

marry - even if you regret it." And then she said, "I suppose Sonia 

doesn't want to break with Randall because of money. Sonia's very fond 

of money."  

 

No more now. How is father? I won't say 'Give him my love'. But you can 

if you think it's better to do so. Have you seen more people? You really 

must not be morbid, darling. 

 

Sonia asks to be remembered to you. She has just come in and is 

closing and unclosing her hands like an angry cat sharpening its claws. 

I think she and R.G. have had another row. Of course Sonia can be very 

irritating. She stares you down with that cool stare of hers. 



 

Lots of love, darling, and buck up. This iodine treatment may make a lot 

of difference. I've been inquiring about it and it really does seem to 

have good results. 

 

Your loving sister, 

 

Letitia 

 

Miss Marple folded the letter and handed it back. She looked 

abstracted. 

 

"Well, what do you think about her?" Craddock urged. "What picture do 

you get of her?"  

 

"Of Sonia? It's difficult, you know, to see anyone through another 

person's mind... Determined to get her own way - that, definitely, I think. 

And wanting the best of two worlds..."  

 

"Closing and unclosing her hands like an angry cat," murmured 

Craddock. "You know, that reminds me of someone..."  

 

He frowned. 

 

"Making inquiries..." murmured Miss Marple. 

 

"If we could get hold of the result of those inquiries," said Craddock. 

 



"Does that letter remind you of anything in St. Mary Mead?" asked 

Bunch rather indistinctly since her mouth was full of pins. 

 

"I really can't say it does, dear... Dr.  is, perhaps, a little like Mr. 

Curtiss the Wesleyan Minister. He wouldn't let his child wear a plate on 

her teeth. Said it was the Lord's Will if her teeth stuck out. 'After all,' I 

said to him, 'you do trim your beard and cut your hair. It might be the 

Lord's Will that your hair should grow out.' He said that was quite 

different. So like a man. But that doesn't help us with our present 

problem."  

 

"We've never traced that revolver, you know. It wasn't Rudi Scherz's. If 

I knew who had had a revolver in Chipping Cleghorn -" 

 

"Colonel Easterbrook has one," said Bunch. "He keeps it in his collar 

drawer."  

 

"How do you know, Mrs. Harmon?"  

 

"Mrs. Butt told me. She's my daily. Or rather, my twice weekly. Being a 

military gentleman, she said, he'd naturally have a revolver and very 

handy it would be if burglars were to come along."  

 

"When did she tell you this?"  

 

"Ages ago. About six months ago, I should think."  

 

"Colonel Easterbrook?" murmured Craddock. 

 



"It's like those pointer things at fairs, isn't it?" said Bunch, still speaking 

through a mouthful of pins. "Go round and round and stop at something 

different every time." 

 

"You're telling me!" said Craddock and groaned. 

 

"Colonel Easterbrook was up at Little Paddocks to leave a book there 

one day. He could have oiled that door then. He was quite 

straightforward about being there though. Not like Miss Hinchliffe."  

 

Miss Marple coughed gently. "You must make allowances for the times 

we live in, Inspector," she said. 

 

Craddock looked at her, uncomprehendingly. 

 

"After all," said Miss Marple, "you are the Police, aren't you? People 

can't say everything they'd like to say to the Police, can they?"  

 

"I don't see why not," said Craddock. "Unless they've got some criminal 

matter to conceal." 

 

"She means butter," said Bunch, crawling actively round a table leg to 

anchor a floating bit of paper. 

 

"Butter and corn for hens, and sometimes cream - and sometimes, even, 

a side of bacon."  

 

"Show him that note from Miss Blacklog," said Miss Marple. "It's some 

time ago now, but it reads like a first-class mystery story."  



 

"What have I done with it. Is this the one you mean, Aunt Marple?"  

 

Miss Marple took it and looked at it. 

 

"Yes," she said with satisfaction. "That's the one."  

 

She handed it to the Inspector. 

 

"I have made inquiries - Thursday is the day," Miss Blacklog had written. 

"Any time after three. If there is any for me leave it in the usual place."  

 

Bunch spat out her pins and laughed. Miss Marple was watching the 

Inspector's face. 

 

The Vicar's wife took it upon herself to explain. 

 

"Thursday is the day one of the farms round here makes butter. They let 

anybody they like have a bit. It's usually Miss Hinchliffe who collects it. 

She's very much in with all the farmers - because of her pigs, I think. 

But it's all a bit hush-hush, you know, a kind of local scheme of barter. 

One person gets butter, and sends along cucumbers, or something like 

that - and a little something when a pig's killed. And now and then an 

animal has an accident and has to be destroyed. Oh, you know the sort 

of thing. Only one can't, very well, say it right out to the Police. Because 

I suppose quite a lot of this barter is illegal - only nobody really knows 

because it's all so complicated. But I expect Hinch had slipped into 

Little Paddocks with a pound of butter or something and had put it in 



the usual place. That's a flour bin under the dresser, by the way. It 

doesn't have flour in it."  

 

Craddock sighed. 

 

"I'm glad I came here to you ladies," he said. 

 

"There used to be clothing coupons, too," said Bunch. "Not usually 

bought - that wasn't considered honest. No money passes. But people 

like Mrs. Butt or Mrs. Finch or Mrs. Huggins like a nice woollen dress or 

a winter coat that hasn't seen too much wear, and they pay for it with 

coupons instead of money."  

 

"You'd better not tell me any more," said Craddock. "It's all against the 

law."  

 

"Then there oughtn't to be such silly laws," said Bunch, filling her 

mouth up with pins again. "I don't do it, of course, because Julian 

doesn't like me to, so I don't. But I know what's going on, of course."  

 

A kind of despair was coming over the Inspector. 

 

"It all sounds so pleasant and ordinary," he said. "Funny and petty and 

simple. And yet one woman and a man have been killed, and another 

woman may be killed before I can get anything definite to go on. I've left 

off worrying about Pip and Emma for the moment. I'm concentrating on 

Sonia. I wish I knew what she looked like. There was a snapshot or two 

in with these letters, but none of the snaps could have been of her."  

 



"How do you know it couldn't have been her? Do you know what she 

looked like?"  

 

"She was small and dark, Miss Blacklog said."  

 

"Really," said Miss Marple, "that's very interesting."  

 

"There was one snap that reminded me vaguely of someone. A tall fair 

girl with her hair all done up on top of her head. I don't know who she 

could have been. Anyway, it can't have been Sonia. Do you think Mrs. 

Swettenham could have been dark when she was a girl?"  

 

"Not very dark," said Bunch. "She's got blue eyes."  

 

"I hoped there might be a photo of Dmitri Stamfordis - but I suppose 

that was too much to hope for..." - he took up the letter - "I'm sorry this 

doesn't suggest anything to you, Miss Marple."  

 

"Oh! but it does," said Miss Marple. "It suggests a good deal. Just read 

it through again, Inspector - especially where it says that Randall 

Goedler was making inquiries about Dmitri Stamfordis."  

 

Craddock stared at her. 

 

The telephone rang. 

 

Bunch got up from the floor and went out into the hall where, in 

accordance with the best Victorian traditions, the telephone had 

originally been placed and where it still was. 



 

She re-entered the room to say to Craddock: "It's for you."  

 

Slightly surprised, the Inspector went out to the instrument - carefully 

shutting the door of the living-room behind him. 

 

"Craddock? Rydesdale here."  

 

"Yes, sir."  

 

"I've been looking through your report. In the interview you had with 

 PhillipaHaymes I see she states positively that she hasn't seen her 

husband since his desertion from the Army?"  

 

"That's right, sir - she was most emphatic. But in my opinion she wasn't 

speaking the truth."  

 

"I agree with you. Do you remember a case about ten days ago - man 

run over by a lorry - taken to Milchester General with concussion and a 

fractured pelvis?"  

 

"The fellow who snatched a child practically from under the wheels of a 

lorry, and got run down himself?"  

 

"That's the one. No papers of any kind on him and nobody came 

forward to identify him. Looked as though he might be on the run. He 

died last night without regaining consciousness. But he's been 

identified - deserter from the Army - Ronald Haymes, ex-Captain in the 

South Loamshires."  



 

" PhillipaHaymes' husband?"  

 

"Yes. He'd got an old Chipping Cleghorn bus ticket on him, by the way - 

and quite a reasonable amount of money."  

 

"So he did get money from his wife? I always thought he was the man 

Mitzi overheard talking to her in the summerhouse. She denied it flatly, 

of course. But surely, sir, that lorry accident was before -" 

 

Rydesdale took the words out of his mouth. 

 

"Yes, he was taken to Milchester General on the 28th. The hold-up at 

Little Paddocks was on the 29th. That lets him out of any possible 

connection with it. But his wife, of course, knew nothing about the 

accident. She may have been thinking all along that he was concerned 

in it. She'd hold her tongue - naturally - after all he was her husband."  

 

"It was a fairly gallant bit of work, wasn't it, sir?" said Craddock slowly. 

 

"Rescuing that child from the lorry? Yes. Plucky. Don't suppose it was 

cowardice that made Haymes desert. Well, all that's past history. For a 

man who'd blotted his copybook, it was a good death."  

 

"I'm glad for her sake," said the Inspector. "And for that boy of theirs."  

 

"Yes, he needn't be too ashamed of his father. And the young woman 

will be able to marry again now."  

 



Craddock said slowly: 

 

"I was thinking of that, sir... It opens up - possibilities."  

 

"Since you're there, it's best to give her the news." 

 

"Yes, Sir. I'll look her up now. Or maybe better to wait till she gets home. 

She may get a shock..." 

 

Chapter 19 RECONSTITUTION OF THE CRIME 

 

"I'll put on a lamp by you before I go," said Bunch. "It's so dark in here. 

There's going to be a storm, I think."  

 

She lifted the small reading lamp to the other side of the table where it 

would throw light on Miss Marple's knitting as she sat in a wide high-

backed chair. 

 

As the flex pulled across the table, Tiglath Pileser the cat, leapt upon it 

and bit and clawed it violently. 

 

"No, Tiglath Pileser, you mustn't... He really is awful. Look, he's nearly 

bitten it through - it's all frayed. Don't you understand, you idiotic puss, 

that you may get a nasty electric shock if you do that?"  

 

"Thank you, dear," said Miss Marple, and put out a hand to turn on the 

lamp. 

 



"It doesn't turn on there. You have to press that silly little switch half-

way along the flex. Wait a minute. I'll take these flowers out of the way."  

 

She lifted a bowl of Christmas roses across the table. Tiglath Pileser, 

his tail switching, put out a mischievous paw and clawed Bunch's arm. 

She spilled some of the water out of the vase. It fell on the frayed area 

of flex and on Tiglath Pileser himself, who leapt to the floor with an 

indignant hiss. 

 

Miss Marple pressed the small pear-shaped switch. Where the water 

had soaked the frayed flex there was a flash and a crackle. 

 

"Oh, dear," said Bunch. "It's fused. Now I suppose all the lights in here 

are off." She tried them. "Yes, they are. So stupid being all on the same 

thingummibob. And it's made a burn on the table, too. Naughty Tiglath 

Pileser - it's all his fault. Aunt Marple - what's the matter? Did it startle 

you?"  

 

"It's nothing, dear. Just something I saw quite suddenly which I ought to 

have seen before..."  

 

"I'll go and fix the fuse and get the lamp from Julian's study."  

 

"No, dear, don't bother. You'll miss your bus. I don't want any more light. 

I just want to sit quietly and - think about something. Hurry dear, or you 

won't catch your bus."  

 



When Bunch had gone, Miss Marple sat quite still for about two minutes. 

The air of the room was heavy and menacing with the gathering storm 

outside. 

 

Miss Marple drew a sheet of paper towards her. 

 

She wrote first: Lamp? and underlined it heavily. After a moment or two, 

she wrote another word. Her pencil travelled down the paper, making 

brief cryptic notes... 

 

II 

 

In the rather dark living-room of Boulders with its low ceiling and 

latticed window panes, Miss Hinchliffe and Miss Murgatroyd were 

having an argument. 

 

"The trouble with you, Murgatroyd," said Miss Hinchliffe, "is that you 

won't try." "But I tell you, Hinch, I can't remember a thing."  

 

"Now look here, Amy Murgatroyd, we're going to do some constructive 

thinking. So far we haven't shone on the detective angle. I was quite 

wrong over that door business. You didn't hold the door open for the 

murderer after all. You're cleared, Murgatroyd!"  

 

Miss Murgatroyd gave a rather watery smile. 

 

"It's just our luck to have the only silent cleaning woman in Chipping 

Cleghorn," continued Miss Hinchliffe. "Usually I'm thankful for it, but 

this time it means we've got off to a bad start. Everybody else in the 



place knows about that second door in the drawing-room being used - 

and we only heard about it yesterday -" 

 

"I still don't quite understand how -" 

 

"It's perfectly simple. Our original premises were quite right. You can't 

hold open a door, wave a torch and shoot with a revolver all at the same 

time. We kept in the revolver and the torch and cut out the door. Well, 

we were wrong. It was the revolver we ought to have cut out."  

 

"But he did have a revolver," said Miss Murgatroyd. "I saw it. It was 

there on the floor beside him."  

 

"When he was dead, yes. It's all quite clear. He didn't fire that revolver -

" 

 

"Then who did?"  

 

"That's what we're going to find out. But whoever did it, the same 

person put a couple of poisoned aspirin tablets by Blacklog's bed 

- and thereby bumped off poor Dora Bunner. And that couldn't have 

been Rudi Scherz, because he's as dead as a doornail. It was someone 

who was in the room that night of the holdup and probably someone 

who was at the birthday party, too. And the only person that lets out is 

Mrs. Harmon."  

 

"You think someone put those aspirins there the day of the birthday 

party?"  

 



"Why not?"  

 

"But how could they?"  

 

"Well, we all went to the loo, didn't we?" said Miss Hinchliffe coarsely. 

"And I washed my hands in the bathroom because of that sticky cake. 

And little Sweetie Easterbrook powdered her grubby little face in 

Blacklog's bedroom, didn't she?"  

 

"Hinch! Do you think she -" 

 

"I don't know yet. Rather obvious, if she did. I don't think if you were 

going to plant some tablets, that you'd want to be seen in the bedroom 

at all. Oh, yes, there were plenty of opportunities."  

 

"The men didn't go upstairs."  

 

"There are back stairs. After all, if a man leaves the room, you don't 

follow him to see if he really is going where you think he is going. It 

wouldn't be delicate! Anyway, don't argue, Murgatroyd. I want to get 

back to the original attempt on Blacklog. Now, to begin with, get 

the facts firmly into your head, because it's all going to depend upon 

you."  

 

Miss Murgatroyd looked alarmed. 

 

"Oh, dear, Hinch, you know what a muddle I get into!"  

 



"It's not a question of your brains, or the grey fluff that passes for 

brains with you. It's a question of eyes. It's a question of what you saw."  

 

"But I didn't see anything."  

 

"The trouble with you is, Murgatroyd, as I said just now, that you won't 

try. Now pay attention. This is what happened. Whoever it is that's got it 

in for Blacklog was there in that room that evening. He (I say he 

because it's easier, but there's no reason why it should be a man more 

than a woman except, of course, that men are dirty dogs), well, he has 

previously oiled that second door that leads out of the drawing-room 

and which is supposed to be nailed up or something. Don't ask me when 

he did it, because that confuses things. Actually, by choosing my time, I 

could walk into any house in Chipping Cleghorn and do anything I liked 

there for half an hour or so with no one being the wiser. It's just a 

question of working out where the daily women are and when the 

occupiers are out and exactly where they've gone and how long they'll 

be. Just good staff work. Now, to continue. He's oiled that second door. 

It will open without a sound. Here's the set-up: Lights go out, door A 

(the regular door) opens with a flourish. Business with torch and hold-

up lines. In the meantime, while we're all goggling, X (that's the best 

term to use) slips quietly out by door B into the dark hall, comes up 

behind that Swiss idiot, takes a couple of shots at Blacklog and 

then shoots the Swiss. Drops the revolver, where lazy thinkers like you 

will assume it's evidence that the Swiss did the shooting, and nips back 

into the room again by the time that someone gets a lighter going. Got 

it?"  

 

"Yes - ye-es, but who was it?"  



 

"Well, if you don't know, Murgatroyd, nobody does!"  

 

"Me?" Miss Murgatroyd fairly twittered in alarm. "But I don't know 

anything at all. I don't really, Hinch!"  

 

"Use that fluff of yours you call a brain. To begin with, where was 

everybody when the lights went out?"  

 

"I don't know."  

 

"Yes, you do. You're maddening, Murgatroyd. You know where you 

were, don't you? You were behind the door."  

 

"Yes - yes, I was. It knocked against my corn when it flew open."  

 

"Why don't you go to a proper chiropodist instead of messing about 

yourself with your feet. You'll give yourself blood poisoning one of these 

days. Come on, now - you're behind the door. I'm standing against the 

mantelpiece with my tongue hanging out for a drink. Blacklog is 

by the table near the archway, getting the cigarettes. Patrick Simmons 

has gone through the archway into the small room where Blacklog 

has had the drinks put. Agreed?"  

 

"Yes, yes, I remember all that."  

 

"Good, now somebody else followed Patrick into that room or was just 

starting to follow him. One of the men. The annoying thing is that I can't 



remember whether it was Easterbrook or Edmund Swettenham. Do you 

remember?"  

 

"No, I don't."  

 

"You wouldn't! And there was someone else who went through to the 

small room;  PhillipaHaymes. I remember that distinctly because I 

remember noticing what a nice flat back she has, and I thought to 

myself 'that girl would look well on a horse.' I was watching her and 

thinking just that. She went over to the mantelpiece in the other room. I 

don't know what it was she wanted there, because at that moment the 

lights went out. 

 

"So that's the position. In the far drawing-room are Patrick Simmons, 

 PhillipaHaymes, and either Colonel Easterbrook or Edmund 

Swettenham - we don't know which. Now, Murgatroyd, pay attention. 

The most probable thing is that it was one of those three who did it. If 

anyone wanted to get out of that far door, they'd naturally take care to 

put themselves in a convenient place when the lights went out. So, as I 

say, in all probability, it's one of those three. And in that case, 

Murgatroyd, there's not a thing you can do about it!"  

 

Miss Murgatroyd brightened perceptibly. 

 

"On the other hand," continued Miss Hinchliffe, "there's the possibility 

that it wasn't one of those three. And that's where you come in, 

Murgatroyd."  

 

"But how should I know anything about it?"  



 

"As I said before, if you don't nobody does."  

 

"But I don't! I really don't! I couldn't see anything at all!" 

 

"Oh, yes, you could. You're the only person who could see. You were 

standing behind the door. You couldn't look at the torch - because the 

door was between you and it. You were facing the other way, the same 

way as the torch was pointing. The rest of us were just dazzled. But you 

weren't dazzled."  

 

"No - no, perhaps not, but I didn't see anything, the torch went round 

and round -" 

 

"Showing you what? It rested on faces, didn't it? And on tables? And on 

chairs?"  

 

"Yes - yes, it did... Miss Bunner, her mouth wide open and her eyes 

popping out of her head, staring and blinking." 

 

"That's the stuff!" Miss Hinchliffe gave a sigh of relief. "The difficulty 

there is in making you use that grey fluff of yours! Now then, keep it 

up."  

 

"But I didn't see any more, I didn't, really."  

 

"You mean you saw an empty room? Nobody standing about? Nobody 

sitting down?"  

 



"No, of course not that. Miss Bunner with her mouth open and Mrs. 

Harmon was sitting on the arm of a chair. She had her eyes tight shut 

and her knuckles all doubled up to her face - like a child."  

 

"Good, that's Mrs. Harmon and Miss Bunner. Don't you see yet what I'm 

getting at? The difficulty is that I don't want to put ideas into your head. 

But when we've eliminated who you did see - we can get on to the 

important point which is, was there anyone you didn't see. Got it? 

Besides the tables and the chairs and the chrysanthemums and the rest 

of it, there were certain people; Julia Simmons, Mrs. Swettenham, Mrs. 

Easterbrook - either Colonel Easterbrook or Edmund Swettenham - 

Dora Bunner and Bunch Harmon. All right, you saw Bunch Harmon and 

Dora Bunner. Cross them off. Now think, Murgatroyd, think, was there 

one of those people who definitely wasn't there?"  

 

Miss Murgatroyd jumped slightly as a branch knocked against the open 

window. She shut her eyes. She murmured to herself... 

 

"The flowers... on the table... the big armchair... the torch didn't come 

round as far as you, Hinch - Mrs. Harmon, yes..."  

 

The telephone rang sharply. Miss Hinchliffe went to it. 

 

"Hallo, yes? The station?"  

 

The obedient Miss Murgatroyd, her eyes closed, was reliving the night 

of the 29th. The torch, sweeping slowly round... a group of people... the 

windows... the sofa... Dora Bunner... the wall... the table with lamp... 

the archway... the sudden spat of the revolver... 



 

"... but that's extraordinary," said Miss Murgatroyd. 

 

"What?" Miss Hinchliffe was barking angrily into the telephone. "Been 

there since this morning? What time? Damn and blast you, and you only 

ring me up now? I'll set the S.P.C.A. after you. An oversight? Is that all 

you've got to say?"  

 

She banged down the receiver. 

 

"It's that dog," she said. "The red setter. Been at the station since this 

morning - since this morning at eight o'clock! Without a drop of water! 

And the idiots only ring me up now. I'm going to get her right away."  

 

She plunged out of the room, Miss Murgatroyd squeaking shrilly in her 

wake. 

 

"But listen, Hinch, a most extraordinary thing... I don't understand it..."  

 

Miss Hinchliffe had dashed out of the door and across to the shed which 

served as a garage. 

 

"We'll go on with it when I come back," she called. "I can't wait for you 

to come with me. You've got your bedroom slippers on as usual."  

 

She pressed the starter of the car and backed out of the garage with a 

jerk. Miss Murgatroyd skipped nimbly sideways. 

 

"But listen, Hinch, I must tell you -" 



 

"When I come back..."  

 

The car jerked and shot forwards. Miss Murgatroyd's voice came faintly 

after it on a high excited note. 

 

"But, Hinch, she wasn't there..."  

 

III 

 

Overhead, the clouds had been gathering thick and blue. As Miss 

Murgatroyd stood looking after the retreating car, the first big drops 

began to fall. 

 

In an agitated fashion, Miss Murgatroyd plunged across to a line of 

string on which she had, some hours previously, hung out a couple of 

jumpers and a pair of woollen combinations to dry. 

 

She was murmuring under her breath: "Really most extraordinary... Oh, 

dear, I shall never get these down in time... And they were nearly dry..."  

 

She struggled with a recalcitrant clothes peg, then turned her head as 

she heard someone approaching. 

 

Then she smiled a pleased welcome. 

 

"Hallo - do go inside, you'll get wet."  

 

"Let me help you."  



 

"Oh, if you don't mind... so annoying if they all get soaked again. I really 

ought to let down the line, but I think I can just reach."  

 

"Here's your scarf. Shall I put it round your neck?"  

 

"Oh, thank you... Yes, perhaps... If I could just reach this peg..."  

 

The woollen scarf was slipped round her neck and then, suddenly, 

pulled tight... 

 

Miss Murgatroyd's mouth opened, but no sound came except a small 

choking gurgle. 

 

And the scarf was pulled tighter still... 

 

IV 

 

On her way back from the station. Miss Hinchliffe stopped the car to 

pick up Miss Marple who was hurrying along the street. 

 

"Hallo," she shouted. "You'll get very wet. Come and have tea with us. I 

saw Bunch waiting for the bus. You'll be all alone at the Vicarage. Come 

and join us. Murgatroyd and I are doing a bit of reconstruction of the 

crime. I rather think we're just getting somewhere. Mind the dog. She's 

rather nervous."  

 

"What a beauty."  

 



"Yes, lovely bitch, isn't she? Those fools kept her at the station since 

this morning without letting me know. I told them off, the lazy beasts. 

Oh! excuse my language. I was brought up by grooms at home in 

Ireland."  

 

The little car turned with a jerk into the small backyard of Boulders. 

 

A crowd of eager dudes and fowls encircled the two ladies as they 

descended. 

 

"Curse Murgatroyd," said Miss Hinchliffe, " she hasn't given 'em their 

corn."  

 

"Is it difficult to get corn?" Miss Marple inquired. Miss Hinchliffe winked. 

 

"I'm in with most of the farmers," she said. 

 

Shooing away the hens, she escorted Miss Marple towards the cottage. 

 

"Hope you're not too wet?"  

 

"No, this is a very good mackintosh."  

 

"I'll light the fire if Murgatroyd hasn't lit it. Hiyah, Murgatroyd? Where is 

the woman? Murgatroyd! Where's that dog? She's disappeared now."  

 

A slow dismal howl came from outside. 

 



"Curse the silly bitch." Miss Hinchliffe tramped to the door and called: 

"Hyou, Cutie - Cutie. Damn' silly name but that's what they called her 

apparently. We must find her another name. Hiyah, Cutie."  

 

The red setter was sniffing at something lying below the taut string 

where a row of garments swirled in the wind. 

 

"Murgatroyd's not even had the sense to bring the washing in. Where is 

she?"  

 

Again the red setter nosed at what seemed to be a pile of clothes, and 

raised her nose high in the air and howled again. 

 

"What's the matter with the dog?"  

 

Miss Hinchliffe strode across the grass. 

 

And quickly, apprehensively, Miss Marple ran after her. They stood 

there, side by side, the rain beating down on them and the older 

woman's arm went round the younger one's shoulders. 

 

She felt the muscles go stiff and taut as Miss Hinchliffe stood looking 

down on the thing lying there, with the blue congested face and the 

protruding tongue. 

 

"I'll kill whoever did this," said Miss Hinchliffe in a low quiet voice, "if I 

once get my hands on her..."  

 

Miss Marple said questioningly: 



 

"Her?"  

 

Miss Hinchliffe turned a ravaged face towards her. 

 

"Yes. I know who it is - near enough... That is, it's one of three 

possibles."  

 

She stood for another moment, looking down at her dead friend, and 

then turned towards the house. Her voice was dry and hard. 

 

"We must ring up the police," she said. "And while we're waiting for 

them, I'll tell you. My fault, in a way, that Murgatroyd's lying out there. I 

made a game of it... Murder isn't a game..."  

 

"No," said Miss Marple. "Murder isn't a game."  

 

"You know something about it, don't you?" said Miss Hinchliffe as she 

lifted the receiver and dialled. She made a brief report and hung up. 

 

"They'll be here in a few minutes... Yes, I heard that you'd been mixed 

up in this sort of business before... I think it was Edmund Swettenham 

told me so... Do you want to hear what we were doing, Murgatroyd and 

I?"  

 

Succinctly she described the conversation held before her departure 

for the station. 

 



"She called after me, you know. Just as I was leaving... That's how I 

know it's a woman and not a man... If I'd waited - if only I'd listened! God 

dammit, the dog could have stopped where she was for another quarter 

of an hour."  

 

"Don't blame yourself, my dear. That does no good. One can't foresee."  

 

"No, one can't... Something tapped against the window, I remember. 

Perhaps she was outside there, then - yes, of course, she must have 

been... coming to the house... and there were Murgatroyd and I 

shouting at each other. Top of our voices... She heard... She heard it 

all..."  

 

"You haven't told me yet what your friend said."  

 

"Just one sentence! 'She wasn't there.'" She paused. "You see? There 

were three women we hadn't eliminated. Mrs. Swettenham, Mrs. 

Easterbrook, Julia Simmons. And one of those three - wasn't there... 

She wasn't there in the drawing-room because she had slipped out 

through the other door and was out in the hall."  

 

"Yes," said Miss Marple, "I see."  

 

"It's one of those three women. I don't know which. But I'll find out!"  

 

"Excuse me," said Miss Marple. "But did she - did Miss Murgatroyd, I 

mean, say it exactly as you said it?"  

 

"How d'you mean - as I said it?"  



 

"Oh, dear, how can I explain? You said it like this. She - wasn't - there. 

An equal emphasis on every word. You see, there are three ways you 

could say it. You could say, 'She wasn't there.' Very personal. Or again. 

'She wasn't there.' Confirming some suspicion already held. Or else you 

could say (and this is nearer to the way you said it just now), 'She 

wasn't there...' quite blankly with the emphasis, if there was emphasis 

on the there." 

 

"I don't know," Miss Hinchliffe shook her head. "I can't remember... 

How the hell can I remember? I think, yes, surely she'd say 'She wasn't 

there'? That would be the natural way, I should think. But I simply don't 

know. Does it make any difference?" 

 

Chapter 20 MISS MARPLE IS MISSING 

 

The postman, rather to his disgust, had lately been given orders to 

make an afternoon delivery of letters in Chipping Cleghorn as well as a 

morning one. 

 

On this particular afternoon he left three letters at Little Paddocks at 

exactly ten minutes to five. 

 

One was addressed to  PhillipaHaymes in a schoolboy's hand; the other 

two were for Miss Blacklog. She opened them as she and PhillipaHaymes sat 

down at the tea table. The torrential rain had enabled PhillipaHaymes to leave 

Dayas Hall early today, since once she had shut up the greenhouses 

there was nothing more to do. 

 



Miss Blacklog tore open her first letter which was a bill for repairing the 

kitchen boiler. She snorted angrily. 

 

"Dymond's prices are preposterous - quite preposterous. Still, I 

suppose all the other people are just as bad."  

 

She opened the second letter which was in a handwriting quite 

unknown to her. 

 

Dear Cousin Letty, 

 

I hope it will be all right for me to come to you on Tuesday? I wrote to 

Patrick two days ago but he hasn't answered. So I presume it's all right. 

Mother is coming to England next month and hopes to see you then. 

 

My train arrives at Chipping Cleghorn at 6:15 if that's convenient? 

 

Yours affectionately, 

 

Julia Simmons 

 

Miss Blacklog read the letter once with astonishment pure and simple, 

and then again with a certain grimness. 

 

She looked up at PhillipaHaymes who was smiling over her son's letter. 

 

"Are Julia and Patrick back, do you know?"  

 

PhillipaHaymes looked up. 



 

"Yes, they came in just after I did. They went upstairs to change. They 

were wet."  

 

"Perhaps you'd not mind going and calling them."  

 

"Of course, I will."  

 

"Wait a moment - I'd like you to read this."  

 

She handed PhillipaHaymes the letter she had received. 

 

PhillipaHaymes read it and frowned. "I don't understand..."  

 

"Nor do I, quite... I think it's about time I did. Call Patrick and Julia, 

PhillipaHaymes."  

 

PhillipaHaymes called from the bottom of the stairs: "Patrick! Julia! Miss 

Blacklog wants you."  

 

Patrick came running down the stairs and entered the room. 

 

"Don't go, PhillipaHaymes," said Miss Blacklog. 

 

"Hallo, Aunt Letty," said Patrick cheerfully. "Want me?"  

 

"Yes, I do. Perhaps you'll give me an explanation of this?"  

 

Patrick's face showed an almost comical dismay as he read. 



 

"I meant to telegraph her! What an ass I am!"  

 

"This letter, I presume, is from your sister Julia?"  

 

"Yes - yes, it is."  

 

Miss Blacklog said grimly: 

 

"Then who, may I ask, is the young woman whom you brought here as 

Julia Simmons, and whom I was given to understand was your sister 

and my cousin?"  

 

"Well - you see - Aunt Letty - the fact of the matter is - I can explain it all 

- I know I oughtn't to have done it - but it really seemed more of a lark 

than anything else. If you'll just let me explain -" 

 

"I am waiting for you to explain. Who is this young woman?"  

 

"Well, I met her at a cocktail party soon after I got demobbed. We got 

talking and I said I was coming here and then - well, we thought it might 

be rather a good wheeze if I brought her along... You see, Julia, the real 

Julia was mad to go on the stage and Mother had seven fits at the idea - 

however, Julia got a chance to join a jolly good repertory company up 

in Perth or somewhere and she thought she'd give it a try - but she 

thought she'd keep Mum calm by letting Mum think that she was here 

with me studying to be a dispenser like a good little girl."  

 

"I still want to know who this other young woman is."  



 

Patrick turned with relief as Julia, cool and aloof, came into the room. 

 

"The balloon's gone up," he said. 

 

Julia raised her eyebrows. Then, still cool, she came forward and sat 

down. 

 

"O.K.," she said. "That's that. I suppose you're very angry?" She 

studied Miss Blacklog's face with almost dispassionate interest. "I 

should be if I were you."  

 

"Who are you?"  

 

Julia sighed. 

 

"I think the moment's come when I make a clean breast of things. Here 

we go. I'm one half of the Pip and Emma combination. To be exact, my 

christened name is Emma Jocelyn Stamfordis - only Father soon 

dropped the Stamfordis. I think he called himself de Courcy next. 

 

"My father and mother, let me tell you, split up about three years after 

Pip and I were born. Each of them went their own way. And they split us 

up. I was Father's part of the loot. He was a bad parent on the whole, 

though quite a charming one. I had various desert spells of being 

educated in convents - when Father hadn't any money, or was 

preparing to engage in some particularly nefarious deal. He used to pay 

the first term with every sign of affluence and then depart and leave me 

on the nuns' hands for a year or two. In the intervals, he and I had some 



very good times together, moving in cosmopolitan society. However, 

the war separated us completely. I've no idea of what's happened to 

him. I had a few adventures myself. I was with the French Resistance 

for a time. Quite exciting. To cut a long story short, I landed up in 

London and began to think about my future. I knew that Mother's 

brother with whom she'd had a frightful row, had died a very rich man. I 

looked up his will to see if there was anything for me. There wasn't - not 

directly, that is to say. I made a few inquiries about his widow - it 

seemed she was quite gaga and kept under drugs and was dying by 

inches. Frankly, it looked as though you were my best bet. You were 

going to come into a hell of a lot of money and from all I could find out, 

you didn't seem to have anyone much to spend it on. I'll be quite frank. 

It occurred to me that if I could get to know you in a friendly kind of way, 

and if you took a fancy to me - well, after all, conditions have changed a 

bit, haven't they, since Uncle Randall died? I mean any money we ever 

had has been swept away in the cataclysm of Europe. I thought you 

might pity a poor orphan girl, all alone in the world, and make her, 

perhaps, a small allowance."  

 

"Oh, you did, did you?" said Miss Blacklog grimly. 

 

"Yes. Of course, I hadn't seen you then... I visualised a kind of sob stuff 

approach... Then, by a marvellous stroke of luck I met Patrick here - 

and he turned out to be your nephew or your cousin, or something. Well, 

that struck me as a marvellous chance. I went bullheaded for Patrick 

and he fell for me in a most gratifying way. The real Julia was all wet 

about this acting stuff and I soon persuaded her it was her duty to Art to 

go and fix herself up in some uncomfortable lodgings in Perth and train 

to be the new Sarah Bernhardt. 



 

"You mustn't blame Patrick too much. He felt awfully sorry for me, all 

alone in the world - and he soon thought it would be a really marvellous 

idea for me to come here as his sister and do my stuff."  

 

"And he also approved of your continuing to tell a tissue of lies to the 

Police?"  

 

"Have a heart, Letty. Don't you see that when that ridiculous hold-up 

business happened - or rather after it happened - I began to feel I was 

in a bit of a spot. Let's face it, I've got a perfectly good motive for 

putting you out of the way. You've only got my word for it now that I 

wasn't the one who tried to do it. You can't expect me deliberately to go 

and incriminate myself. Even Patrick got nasty ideas about me from 

time to time, and if even he could think things like that, what on earth 

would the police think? That Detective-Inspector struck me as a man of 

singularly sceptical mind. No, I figured out the only thing for me to do 

was to sit tight as Julia and just fade away when term came to an end. 

 

"How was I to know that fool Julia, the real Julia, would go and have a 

row with the producer, and fling the whole thing up in a fit of 

temperament? She writes to Patrick and asks if she can come here, and 

instead of wiring her 'Keep away' he goes and forgets to do anything at 

all!" She cast an angry glance at Patrick. "Of all the utter idiots."  

 

She sighed. 

 

"You don't know the straits I've been put to in Milchester! Of course, I 

haven't been to the hospital at all. But I had to go somewhere. Hours 



and hours I've spent in the pictures seeing the most frightful films over 

and over again."  

 

"Pip and Emma," murmured Miss Blacklog. "I never believed, somehow, 

in spite of what the Inspector said, that they were real -" 

 

She looked searchingly at Julia. 

 

"You're Emma," she said. "Where's Pip?"  

 

Julia's eyes, limpid and innocent, met hers. 

 

"I don't know," she said. "I haven't the least idea."  

 

"I think you're lying, Julia. When did you see him last?"  

 

Was there a momentary hesitation before Julia spoke? 

 

She said clearly and deliberately: "I haven't seen him since we were 

both three years old - when my mother took him away. I haven't seen 

either him or my mother. I don't know where they are."  

 

"And that's all you have to say?"  

 

Julia sighed. 

 

"I could say I was sorry. But it wouldn't really be true; because actually 

I'd do the same thing again though not if I'd known about this murder 

business, of course."  



 

"Julia," said Miss Blacklog, "(I call you that because I'm used to it). You 

were with the French Resistance, you say?"  

 

"Yes. For eighteen months."  

 

"Then I suppose you learned to shoot?"  

 

Again those cool blue eyes met hers. 

 

"I can shoot all right. I'm a first-class shot. I didn't shoot at you, 

Blacklog, though you've only got my word for that. But I can tell you this, 

that if I had shot at you, I wouldn't have been likely to miss."  

 

II 

 

The sound of a car driving up to the door broke through the tenseness 

of the moment. 

 

"Who can that be?" asked Miss Blacklog. 

 

Mitzi put a tousled head in. She was showing the whites of her eyes. 

 

"It is the Police come again," she said. "This, it is persecution! Why will 

they not leave us alone? I will not bear it. I will write to the Prime 

Minister. I will write to your King."  

 



Craddock's hand put her firmly and not too kindly aside. He came in 

with such a grim set to his lips that they all looked at him 

apprehensively. This was a new Inspector Craddock. 

 

He said sternly: "Miss Murgatroyd has been murdered. She was 

strangled - not more than an hour ago." His eye singled out Julia. "You - 

Miss Simmons - where have you been all day?"  

 

Julia said warily: 

 

"In Milchester. I've just got in."  

 

"And you?" The eye went on to Patrick. 

 

"Yes."  

 

"Did you both come back here together?"  

 

"Yes - yes, we did," said Patrick. 

 

"No," said Julia. "It's no good, Patrick. That's the kind of lie that will be 

found out at once. The bus people know us well. I came back on the 

earlier bus, Inspector - the one that gets here at four o'clock."  

 

"And what did you do then?"  

 

"I went for a walk."  

 

"In the direction of Boulders?"  



 

"No, I went across the fields."  

 

He stared at her. Julia, her face pale, her lips tense, stared back. 

 

Before anyone could speak, the telephone rang. 

 

Miss Blacklog, with an inquiring glance at Craddock, picked up the 

receiver. 

 

"Yes. Who? Oh, Bunch. What? No. No, she hasn't. I've no idea... Yes, 

he's here now."  

 

She lowered the instrument and said: "Mrs. Harmon would like to speak 

to you, Inspector. Miss Marple has not come back to the Vicarage and 

Mrs. Harmon is worried about her."  

 

Craddock took two strides forward and gripped the telephone. 

 

"Craddock speaking."  

 

"I'm worried, Inspector." Bunch's voice came through with a childish 

tremor in it. "Aunt Marple's out somewhere - and I don't know where. And 

they say that Miss Murgatroyd's been killed. Is it true?"  

 

"Yes, it's true, Mrs. Harmon. Miss Marple was there with Miss Hinchliffe 

when they found the body."  

 

"Oh, so that's where she is." Bunch sounded relieved. 



 

"No - no, I'm afraid she isn't. Not now. She left there about - let me see - 

half an hour ago. She hasn't got home?"  

 

"No - she hasn't. It's only ten minutes' walk. Where can she be?"  

 

"Perhaps she's called in on one of your neighbours?"  

 

"I've rung them up - all of them. She's not there. I'm frightened, 

Inspector."  

 

"So am I," thought Craddock. 

 

He said quickly: 

 

"I'll come round to you - at once."  

 

"Oh, do - there's a piece of paper. She was writing on it before she went 

out. I don't know if it means anything... It just seems gibberish to me."  

 

Craddock replaced the receiver. 

 

Miss Blacklog said anxiously: 

 

"Has something happened to Miss Marple? Oh, I hope not."  

 

"I hope not, too." His mouth was grim. 

 

"She's so old - and frail."  



 

"I know."  

 

Miss Blacklog, standing with her hand pulling at the choker of pearls 

round her neck, said in a hoarse voice: 

 

"It's getting worse and worse. Whoever's doing these things must be 

mad, Inspector - quite mad..."  

 

"I wonder."  

 

The choker of pearls round Miss Blacklog's neck broke under the 

clutch of her nervous fingers. The smooth white globules rolled all over 

the room. 

 

Blacklog cried out in an anguished tone. 

 

"My pearls - my pearls -" The agony in her voice was so acute that they 

all looked at her in astonishment. 

 

She turned, her hand to her throat, and rushed sobbing out of the room. 

 

PhillipaHaymes began picking up the pearls. 

 

"I've never seen her so upset over anything," she said. "Of course she 

always wears them. Do you think, perhaps, that someone special gave 

them to her? Randall Goedler, perhaps."  

 

"It's possible," said the Inspector slowly. 



 

"They're not - they couldn't be - real by any chance?" PhillipaHaymes asked 

from where, on her knees, she was still collecting the white shining 

globes. 

 

Taking one in his hand, Craddock was just about to reply 

contemptuously, "Real? Of course not!" when he suddenly stifled the 

words. 

 

After all, could the pearls be real? 

 

They were so large, so even, so white that their falseness seemed 

palpable, but Craddock remembered suddenly a police case where a 

string of real pearls had been bought for a few shillings in a 

pawnbroker's shop. 

 

 Blacklog had assured him that there was no jewellery of value in 

the house. If these pearls were, by any chance, genuine, they must be 

worth a fabulous sum. And if Randall Goedler had given them to her - 

then they might be worth any sum you cared to name. 

 

They looked false - they must be false, but - if they were real? 

 

Why not? She might herself be unaware of their value. Or she might 

choose to protect her treasure by treating it as though it were a cheap 

ornament worth a couple of guineas at most. What would they be worth 

if real? A fabulous sum... Worth doing murder for - if anybody knew 

about them. 

 



With a start, the Inspector wrenched himself away from his 

speculations. Miss Marple was missing. He must go to the Vicarage. 

 

III 

 

He found Bunch and her husband waiting for him, their faces anxious 

and drawn. 

 

"She hasn't come back," said Bunch. 

 

"Did she say she was coming back here when she left Boulders?" asked 

Julian. 

 

"She didn't actually say so," said Craddock slowly, throwing his mind 

back to the last time he had seen  Marple. 

 

He remembered the grimness of her lips and the severe frosty light in 

those usually gentle blue eyes. Grimness, an inexorable determination... 

to do what? To go where? 

 

"She was talking to Sergeant Fletcher when I last saw her," he said. 

"Just by the gate. And then she went through it and out. I took it she 

was going straight home to the Vicarage. I would have sent her in the 

car - but there was so much to attend to, and she slipped away very 

quietly. Fletcher may know something! Where's Fletcher?"  

 

But Sergeant Fletcher, it seemed, as Craddock learned when he rang 

up Boulders, was neither to be found there nor had he left any message 



where he had gone. There was some idea that he had returned to 

Milchester for some reason. 

 

The Inspector rang up headquarters in Milchester, but no news of 

Fletcher was to be found there. 

 

Then Craddock turned to Bunch as he remembered what she had told 

him over the telephone. 

 

"Where's that paper? You said she'd been writing something on a bit of 

paper."  

 

Bunch brought it to him. He spread it out on the table and looked down 

on it. Bunch leant over his shoulder and spelled it out as he read. The 

writing was shaky and not easy to read: 

 

Lamp. 

 

Then came the word "Violets". 

 

Then after a space: 

 

Where is bottle of aspirin? 

 

The next item in this curious list was more difficult to make out.  

 

"Delicious Death," Bunch read. "That's Mitzi's cake."  

 

"Making enquiries," read Craddock. 



 

"Inquiries? What about, I wonder? What's this? Severe affliction bravely 

borne... What on earth?" 

 

"Iodine," read the Inspector. "Pearls. Ah, pearls."  

 

"And then Lotty - no, Letty. Her e's look like o's. And then Berne. And 

what's this? Old Age Pension..." 

 

They looked at each other in bewilderment. 

 

Craddock recapitulated swiftly: "Lamp. Violets. Where is bottle of 

aspirin? Delicious Death. Making enquiries. Severe affliction bravely 

borne. Iodine. Pearls. Letty. Berne. Old Age Pension."  

 

Bunch asked: "Does it mean anything? Anything at all? I can't see any 

connection."  

 

Craddock said slowly: "I've just a glimmer - but I don't see. It's odd that 

she should have put down that about pearls."  

 

"What about pearls? What does it mean?"  

 

"Does Miss Blacklog always wear that three tier choker of pearls?"  

 

"Yes, she does. We laugh about it sometimes. They're so dreadfully 

false looking, aren't they? But I suppose she thinks it's fashionable."  

 

"There might be another reason," said Craddock slowly. 



 

"You don't mean that they're real. Oh! they couldn't be!"  

 

"How often have you had an opportunity of seeing real pearls of that 

size, Mrs. Harmon?"  

 

"But they're so glassy."  

 

Craddock shrugged his shoulders. 

 

"Anyway, they don't matter now. It's Miss Marple that matters. We've 

got to find her."  

 

They'd got to find her before it was too late - but perhaps it was already 

too late? Those pencilled words showed that she was on the track... But 

that was dangerous - horribly dangerous. And where the hell was 

Fletcher? 

 

Craddock strode out of the Vicarage to where he'd left his car. Search - 

that was all he could do - search. 

 

A voice spoke to him out of the dripping laurels. 

 

"Sir!" said Sergeant Fletcher urgently. "Sir..." 

 

Chapter 21 THREE WOMEN 

 

Dinner was over at Little Paddocks. It had been a silent and 

uncomfortable meal. 



 

Patrick, uneasily aware of having fallen from grace, only made 

spasmodic attempts at conversation - and such as he did make were 

not well received.  PhillipaHaymes was sunk in abstraction. Miss 

Blacklog herself had abandoned the effort to behave with her normal 

cheerfulness. She had changed for dinner and had come down wearing 

her necklace of cameos but for the first time fear showed from her 

darkly circled eyes, and betrayed itself by her twitching hands. 

 

Julia alone, had maintained her air of cynical detachment throughout 

the evening. 

 

"I'm sorry, Letty," she said, "that I can't pack my bag and go. But I 

presume the police wouldn't allow it. I don't suppose I'll darken your 

roof - or whatever the expression is - for long. I should imagine that 

Inspector Craddock will be round with a warrant and the handcuffs any 

moment. In fact, I can't imagine why something of the kind hasn't 

happened already."  

 

"He's looking for the old lady - for Miss Marple," said Miss Blacklog. 

 

"Do you think she's been murdered, too?" Patrick asked with scientific 

curiosity. "But why? What could she know?"  

 

"I don't know," said Miss Blacklog dully. "Perhaps Miss Murgatroyd told 

her something."  

 

"If she's been murdered too," said Patrick, "there seems to be logically 

only one person who could have done it."  



 

"Who?"  

 

"Hinchliffe, of course," said Patrick triumphantly. "That's where she 

was last seen alive - at Boulders. My solution would be that she never 

left Boulders."  

 

"My head aches," said Miss Blacklog in a dull voice. She pressed her 

fingers to her forehead. "Why should Hinch murder Miss Marple? It 

doesn't make sense."  

 

"It would if Hinch had really murdered Murgatroyd," said Patrick 

triumphantly. 

 

PhillipaHaymes came out of her apathy to say: "Hinch wouldn't murder 

Murgatroyd."  

 

Patrick was in an argumentative mood. "She might have if Murgatroyd 

had blundered on something to show that - she - Hinch - was the 

criminal."  

 

"Anyway, Hinch was at the station when Murgatroyd was killed."  

 

"She could have murdered Murgatroyd before she left."  

 

Startling them all, Blacklog suddenly screamed out: 

 

"Murder, murder, murder - Can't you talk of anything else? I'm 

frightened, don't you understand? I'm frightened. I wasn't before. I 



thought I could take care of myself... But what can you do against a 

murderer who's waiting - and watching - and biding his time! Oh, God!"  

 

She dropped her head forward on her hands. A moment later she 

looked up and apologised stiffly. 

 

"I'm sorry. I - I lost control."  

 

"That's all right, Aunt Letty," said Patrick affectionately. "I'll look after 

you."  

 

"You?" was all Blacklog said, but the disillusionment behind the 

word was almost an accusation. 

 

That had been shortly before dinner, and Mitzi had then created a 

diversion by coming and declaring that she was not going to cook the 

dinner. 

 

"I do not do anything more in this house. I go to my room. I lock myself 

in. I stay there until it is daylight. I am afraid - people are being killed - 

that Miss Murgatroyd with her stupid English face - who would want to 

kill her? Only a maniac! Then it is a maniac that is about! And a maniac 

does not care who he kills. But me, I do not want to be killed! There are 

shadows in that kitchen - and I hear noises - I think there is someone 

out in the yard and then I think I see a shadow by the larder door and 

then it is footsteps I hear. So I go now to my room and I lock the door 

and perhaps even I put the chest of drawers against it. And in the 

morning I tell that cruel hard policeman that I go away from here. And if 



he will not let me I say: 'I scream and I scream and I scream until you 

have to let me go!'" 

 

Everybody, with a vivid recollection of what Mitzi could do in the 

screaming line, shuddered at the threat. 

 

"So I go to my room," said Mitzi, repeating the statement once more to 

make her intentions quite clear. With a symbolic action she cast off the 

cretonne apron she had been wearing. "Good night, Miss Blacklog. 

Perhaps in the morning, you may not be alive. So in case that is so, I say 

goodbye."  

 

She departed abruptly and the door, with its usual gentle little whine, 

closed softly after her. 

 

Julia got up. 

 

"I'll see to dinner," she said in a matter-of-fact way. "Rather a good 

arrangement - less embarrassing for you all than having me sit down at 

the table with you. Patrick (since he's constituted himself your 

protector, Aunt Letty) had better taste every dish first. I don't want to 

be accused of poisoning you on top of everything else." 

 

So Julia had cooked and served a really excellent meal. PhillipaHaymes had 

come out to the kitchen with an offer of assistance but Julia had said 

firmly that she didn't want any help. 

 

"Julia, there's something I want to say -" 

 



"This is no time for girlish confidences," said Julia firmly. "Go on back 

in the dining-room, PhillipaHaymes."  

 

Now dinner was over and they were in the drawing-room with coffee on 

the small table by the fire - and nobody seemed to have anything to say. 

They were waiting - that was all. 

 

At 8:30 Inspector Craddock rang up. 

 

"I shall be with you in about a quarter of an hour's time," he announced. 

"I'm bringing Colonel and Mrs. Easterbrook and Mrs. Swettenham and 

her son with me."  

 

"But really, Inspector... I can't cope with people tonight -" Miss 

Blacklog's voice sounded as though she were at the end of her tether.  

 

"I know how you feel, Miss Blacklog. I'm sorry. But this is urgent."  

 

"Have you found Miss Marple?"  

 

"No," said the Inspector and rang off.  

 

Julia took the coffee tray out to the kitchen where, to her surprise, she 

found Mitzi contemplating the piled up dishes and plates by the sink. 

 

Mitzi burst into a torrent of words. 

 

"See what you do in my so nice kitchen! That frying pan - only, only for 

omelettes do I use it! And you, what have you used it for?"  



 

"Frying onions."  

 

"Ruined - ruined. It will have now to be washed and never - never - do I 

wash my omelette pan. I rub it carefully over with a greasy newspaper, 

that is all. And this saucepan here that you have used - that one, I use 

him only for milk -" 

 

"Well, I don't know what pans you use for what," said Julia crossly. "You 

chose to go to bed and why on earth you've chosen to get up again, I 

can't imagine. Go away again and leave me to wash up in peace."  

 

"No, I will not let you use my kitchen."  

 

"Oh, Mitzi, you are impossible!"  

 

Julia stalked angrily out of the kitchen and at that moment the door bell 

rang. 

 

"I do not go to the door," Mitzi called from the kitchen. Julia muttered 

an impolite continental expression under her breath and stalked to the 

front door. 

 

It was Miss Hinchliffe. 

 

"'Evening," she said in her gruff voice. "Sorry to barge in. Inspector's 

rung up, I expect?"  

 



"He didn't tell us you were coming," said Julia, leading the way to the 

drawing-room. 

 

"He said I needn't come unless I liked," said Miss Hinchliffe. "But I do 

like."  

 

Nobody offered Miss Hinchliffe sympathy or mentioned Miss 

Murgatroyd's death. The ravaged face of the tall vigorous woman told 

its own tale, and would have made any expression of sympathy an 

impertinence. 

 

"Turn all the lights on," said Miss Blacklog. "And put more coal on the 

fire. I'm cold - horribly cold. Come and sit here by the fire, Miss 

Hinchliffe. The Inspector said he would be here in a quarter of an hour. 

It must be nearly that now."  

 

"Mitzi's come down again," said Julia. 

 

"Has she? Sometimes I think that girl's mad - quite mad. But then 

perhaps we're all mad."  

 

"I've no patience with this saying that all people who commit crimes are 

mad," barked Miss Hinchliffe. "For me, all criminals are sane, intelligent 

even... in an awful way." 

 

They heard the sound of an approaching car, and soon Inspector 

Craddock came in, bringing Coronel and Mrs. Easterbrook and Edmund 

and Mrs. Swettenham along. 

 



All looked circumspect. In a low voice, Coronel Easterbrook said: 

 

"Oh, oh! A nice fire!" 

 

Mrs. Swettenham tried to cheer the atmosphere up, producing almost a 

parody of herself: 

 

"It's weird, isn't it?" she said. "All of this I mean. It's best to say nothing. 

The trouble is that we don't know who will be next... like in epidemics, 

isn't it?"  

 

"Mother," said Edmund in a voice of acute suffering, "can't you shut 

up?"  

 

"I'm sure, dear, I don't want to say a word," said Mrs. Swettenham, and 

sat down on the sofa by Julia. Inspector Craddock stood near the door. 

Facing him, almost in a row, were the three women. Julia and Mrs. 

Swettenham on the sofa. Mrs. Easterbrook on the arm of her husband's 

chair. He had not brought about this arrangement, but it suited him very 

well. 

 

Miss Blacklog and Miss Hinchliffe were crouching over the fire. Edmund 

stood near them. PhillipaHaymes was far back in the shadows. 

 

Craddock began without preamble. 

 

"You all know that Miss Murgatroyd's been killed," he began. "We've 

reason to believe that the person who killed her was a woman. And for 

certain other reasons we can narrow it down still more. I'm about to ask 



certain ladies here to account for what they were doing between the 

hours of four and four-twenty this afternoon. I have already had an 

account of her movements from - from the young lady who has been 

calling herself Miss Simmons. I will ask her to repeat that statement. At 

the same time, Miss Simmons, I must caution you that you need not 

answer if you think your answers may incriminate you, and anything 

you say will be taken down by Constable Edwards and may be used as 

evidence in court."  

 

"You have to say that, don't you?" said Julia. She was rather pale, but 

still composed. "I repeat that between four and four-thirty I was walking 

along the field leading down to the brook by Compton Farm. I came 

back to the road by that field with three poplars in it. I didn't meet 

anyone as far as I can remember. I did not go near Boulders."  

 

"Mrs. Swettenham?"  

 

Edmund said, "Are you cautioning all of us?"  

 

The Inspector turned to him. 

 

"No. At the moment only Miss Simmons. I have no reason to believe that 

any other statement made will be incriminating, but anyone, of course, 

is entitled to have a solicitor present and to refuse to answer questions 

unless he is present."  

 

"Oh, but that would be very silly and a complete waste of time," cried 

Mrs. Swettenham. "I'm sure I can tell you at once exactly what I was 

doing. That's what you want, isn't it? Shall I begin now?"  



 

"Yes, please, Mrs. Swettenham."  

 

"Now, let me see." Mrs. Swettenham closed her eyes, opened them 

again. "Of course I had nothing at all to do with killing Miss Murgatroyd. 

I'm sure everybody here knows that. But I'm a woman of the world, I 

know quite well that the police have to ask all the most unnecessary 

questions and write the answers down very carefully, because it's all 

for what they call 'the record.' That's it, isn't it?" Mrs. Swettenham 

flashed the question at the diligent Constable Edwards and added 

graciously, "I'm not going too fast for you, I hope?" Constable Edwards, 

a good shorthand writer, but with little social savoir-faire, turned red to 

the ears and replied: 

 

"It's quite all right, madam. Well, perhaps a little slower would be 

better."  

 

Mrs. Swettenham resumed her discourse with emphatic pauses where 

she considered a comma or a full stop might be appropriate. 

 

"Well, of course it's difficult to say - exactly - because I've not got, really, 

a very good sense of time. And ever since the war quite half our clocks 

haven't gone at all, and the ones that do go are often either fast or slow 

or stop because we haven't wound them up." Mrs. Swettenham paused 

to let this picture of confused time sink in and then went on earnestly, 

"What I think I was doing at four o'clock was turning the heel of my sock 

(and for some extraordinary reason I was going round the wrong way - 

in purl, you know, not plain) but if I wasn't doing that, I must have been 



outside snipping off the dead chrysanthemums - no, that was earlier - 

before the rain."  

 

"The rain," said the inspector, "started at 4:10 exactly."  

 

"Did it now? That helps a lot. Of course, I was upstairs putting a wash-

basin in the passage where the rain always comes through. And it was 

coming through so fast that I guessed at once that the gutter was 

stopped up again. So I came down and got my mackintosh and rubber 

boots. I called Edmund, but he didn't answer, so I thought perhaps he'd 

got to a very important place in his novel and I wouldn't disturb him, and 

I've done it quite often myself before. With the broom handle, you know, 

tied on to that long thing you push up windows with."  

 

"You mean," said Craddock, noting bewilderment on his subordinate's 

face, "that you were cleaning out the gutter?"  

 

"Yes, it was all choked up with leaves. It took a long time and I got 

rather wet, but I got it clear at last. And then I went in and got changed 

and washed - so smelly, dead leaves - and then I went into the kitchen 

and put the kettle on. It was 6:15 by the kitchen clock."  

 

Constable Edwards blinked. 

 

"Which means," finished Mrs. Swettenham triumphantly, "that it was 

exactly twenty minutes to five. 

 

"Or near enough," she added. 

 



"Did anybody see what you were doing whilst you were out cleaning the 

gutter?"  

 

"No, indeed," said Mrs. Swettenham, "I'd soon have roped them in to 

help if they had! It's a most difficult thing to do single-handed."  

 

"So, by your own statement, you were outside, in a mackintosh and 

boots, at the time when the rain was coming down, and according to 

you, you were employed during that time in cleaning out a gutter but 

you have no one who can substantiate that statement?"  

 

"You can look at the gutter," said Mrs. Swettenham. "It's beautifully 

clear."  

 

"Did you hear your mother call to you, Mr. Swettenham?"  

 

"No," said Edmund. "I was fast asleep."  

 

"Edmund," said his mother reproachfully, "I thought you were writing."  

 

Inspector Craddock turned to Mrs. Easterbrook. "Now, Mrs. 

Easterbrook?"  

 

"I was sitting with Archie in his study," said Mrs. Easterbrook fixing 

wide innocent eyes on him. "We were listening to the wireless together, 

weren't we, Archie?"  

 

There was a pause. Colonel Easterbrook was very red in the face. He 

took his wife's hand in his. 



 

"You don't understand these things, kitten," he said. 

 

"I - well, I must say, Inspector, you've rather sprung this business on us. 

My wife, you know, has been terribly upset by all this. She's nervous 

and highly strung and doesn't appreciate the importance of - of taking 

due consideration before she makes a statement."  

 

"Archie," cried Mrs. Easterbrook reproachfully, "are you going to say 

you weren't with me?"  

 

"Well, I wasn't, was I, my dear? I mean one's got to stick to the facts. 

Very important in this sort of inquiry. I was talking to Lampson, the 

farmer at Croft End, about some chicken netting. That was about a 

quarter to four. I didn't get home until after the rain had stopped. Just 

before tea. A quarter to five. Laura was toasting the scones."  

 

"And had you been out also, Mrs. Easterbrook?"  

 

The pretty face looked more like a weasel's than ever. Her eyes had a 

trapped look. 

 

"No - no, I just sat listening to the wireless. I didn't go out. Not then. I'd 

been out earlier. About - about half-past three. Just for a little walk. Not 

far."  

 

She looked as though she expected more questions, but Craddock said 

quietly: 

 



"That's all, Mrs. Easterbrook."  

 

He went on: "These statements will be typed out. You can read them 

and sign them if they are substantially correct."  

 

Mrs. Easterbrook looked at him with sudden venom. 

 

"Why don't you ask the others where they were? That PhillipaHaymes woman? 

And Edmund Swettenham? How do you know he was asleep indoors? 

Nobody saw him."  

 

Inspector Craddock said quietly: 

 

"Miss Murgatroyd, before she died, made a certain statement. On the 

night of the hold-up here, someone was absent from this room. 

Someone who was supposed to have been in the room all the time. Miss 

Murgatroyd told her friend the names of the people she did see. By a 

process of elimination, she made the discovery that there was someone 

she did not see."  

 

"Nobody could see anything," said Julia. 

 

"Murgatroyd could," said Miss Hinchliffe, speaking suddenly in her 

deep voice. "She was over there behind the door, where Inspector 

Craddock is now. She was the only person who could see anything of 

what was happening."  

 

"Aha! That is what you think, is it!" demanded Mitzi. 

 



She made one of her dramatic entrances, flinging open the door and 

almost knocking Craddock sideways. She was in a frenzy of excitement. 

 

"Ah, you do not ask Mitzi to come in here with the others, do you, you 

stiff policeman? I am only Mitzi! Mitzi in the kitchen! Let her stay in the 

kitchen where she belongs! But I tell you that Mitzi, as well as anyone 

else, and perhaps better, yes, better, can see things. Yes, I see things. I 

see something the night of the burglary. I see something and I do not 

quite believe it, and I hold my tongue till now. I think to myself I will not 

tell what it is I have seen, not yet. I will wait."  

 

"And when everything had calmed down, you meant to ask for a little 

money from a certain person, eh?" said Craddock. 

 

Mitzi turned on him like an angry cat. 

 

"And why not? Why look down your nose? Why should I not be paid for it 

if I have been so generous as to keep silence? Especially if some day 

there will be money - much much money. Oh! I have heard things - I 

know what goes on. I know this - Pippemmer - this secret society of 

which she -" she flung a dramatic finger towards Julia - "is an agent. 

Yes, I would have waited and asked for money - but now I am afraid. I 

would rather be safe. For soon, perhaps, someone will kill me. So I will 

tell what I know."  

 

"All right then," said the Inspector sceptically. "What do you know?"  

 

"I tell you." Mitzi spoke solemnly. "On that night I am not in the pantry 

cleaning silver as I say - I am already in the dining-room when I hear the 



gun go off. I look through the keyhole. The hall it is black, but the gun go 

off again and the torch it falls - and it swings round as it falls - and I see 

her. I see her there close to him, with the gun in her hand. I see Miss 

Blacklog." 

 

"Me?" Miss Blacklog sat up in astonishment. "You must be mad!"  

 

"But that's impossible," cried Edmund. "Mitzi couldn't have seen Miss 

Blacklog." 

 

Craddock cut in and his voice had the corrosive quality of a deadly acid. 

 

"Couldn't she, Mr. Swettenham? And why not? Because it wasn't Miss 

Blacklog who was standing there with the gun? It was you, wasn't it?"  

 

"I? - of course not - what the hell -" 

 

"You took Colonel Easterbrook's revolver. You fixed up the business 

with Rudi Scherz - as a good joke. You had followed Patrick Simmons 

into the far room and when the lights went out, you slipped out through 

the carefully oiled door. You shot at Miss Blacklog and then you killed 

Rudi Scherz. A few seconds later you were back in the drawing-room 

clicking your lighter."  

 

For a moment Edmund seemed at a loss for words, then he spluttered 

out: 

 

"The whole idea is monstrous. Why me? What earthly motive had I got?"  

 



"If Miss Blacklog dies before Mrs. Goedler, two people inherit, 

remember. The two we know of as Pip and Emma. Julia Simmons has 

turned out to be Emma -" 

 

"And you think I'm Pip?" Edmund laughed. "Fantastic - absolutely 

fantastic! I'm about the right age nothing else. And I can prove to you, 

you damned fool, that I am Edmund Swettenham. Birth certificate, 

schools, university - everything."  

 

"He isn't Pip." The voice came from the shadows in the corner.  

PhillipaHaymes came forward, her face pale. "I'm Pip, Inspector."  

 

"You, PhillipaHaymes?"  

 

"Yes. Everybody seems to have assumed that Pip was a boy - Julia 

knew, of course, that her twin was another girl - I don't know why she 

didn't say so this afternoon -" 

 

"Family solidarity," said Julia. "I suddenly realised who you were. I'd 

had no idea till that moment."  

 

"I'd - had the same idea as Julia did," said PhillipaHaymes, her voice trembling 

a little. "After I - lost my husband and the war was over, I wondered 

what I was going to do. My mother died many years ago. I found out 

about my Goedler relations. Mrs. Goedler was dying and at her death 

the money would go to a Miss Blacklog. I found out where Miss Blacklog 

lived and I - I came here. I took a job with Mrs. Lucas. I hoped that, since 

this Miss Blacklog was an elderly woman without relatives, she might, 

perhaps, be willing to help. Not me, because I could work, but help with 



Harry's education. After all, it was Goedler money and she'd no one 

particular of her own to spend it on. 

 

"And then," PhillipaHaymes spoke faster, it was as though, now her long 

reserve had broken down, she couldn't get the words out fast enough, 

"that hold-up happened and I began to be frightened. Because it 

seemed to me that the only possible person with a motive for killing 

Miss Blacklog was me. I hadn't the least idea who Julia was - we aren't 

identical twins and we're not much alike to look at. No, it seemed as 

though I was the only one bound to be suspected."  

 

She stopped and pushed her fair hair back from her face, and 

Craddock suddenly realised that the faded snapshot in the box of 

letters must have been a photograph of PhillipaHaymes's mother. The likeness 

was undeniable. He knew too why that mention of closing and unclosing 

hands had seemed familiar - PhillipaHaymes was doing it now. 

 

"Miss Blacklog has been good to me. Very very good to me - I didn't try 

to kill her. I never thought of killing her. But all the same, I'm Pip." She 

added, "You see, you needn't suspect Edmund any more."  

 

"Needn't I?" said Craddock. Again there was that acid biting tone in his 

voice. "Edmund Swettenham's a young man who's fond of money. A 

young man, perhaps, who would like to marry a rich wife. But she 

wouldn't be a rich wife unless Miss Letitia died before Mrs. Goedler. 

And since it seemed almost certain that Mrs. Goedler would die before 

Miss Letitia, well - he had to do something about it - didn't you, Mr. 

Swettenham?"  

 



"It's a damned lie!" Edmund shouted. 

 

And then, suddenly, a sound rose on the air. It came from the kitchen - a 

long unearthly shriek of terror. 

 

"That isn't Mitzi!" cried Julia. 

 

"No," said Inspector Craddock, "it's someone who's murdered three 

people..." 

 

Chapter 22 THE TRUTH 

 

When the Inspector turned on Edmund Swettenham, Mitzi had crept 

quietly out of the room and back to the kitchen. She was running water 

into the sink when Miss Blacklog entered. 

 

Mitzi gave her a shame-faced sideways look. "What a liar you are, 

Mitzi," said Miss Blacklog pleasantly. "Here - that isn't the way to wash 

up. The silver first, and fill the sink right up. You can't wash up in about 

two inches of water."  

 

Mitzi turned the taps on obediently. 

 

"You are not angry at what I say, Miss Blacklog?" she asked. 

 

"If I were to be angry at all the lies you tell, I should never be out of a 

temper," said Miss Blacklog. 

 



"I will go and say to the Inspector that I make it all up, shall I?" asked 

Mitzi. 

 

"He knows that already," said Miss Blacklog, pleasantly. 

 

Mitzi turned off the taps and as she did so two hands came up behind 

her head and with one swift movement forced it down into the water-

filled sink. 

 

"Only I know that you're telling the truth for once," said Miss Blacklog 

viciously. 

 

Mitzi thrashed and struggled but Miss Blacklog was strong and her 

hands held the girl's head firmly under water. 

 

Then, from somewhere quite close behind her, Dora Bunner's voice 

rose piteously on the air: 

 

"Oh Lotty - Lotty - don't do it... Lotty."  

 

Miss Blacklog screamed. Her hands flew up in the air, and Mitzi, 

released, came up choking and spluttering. 

 

Miss Blacklog screamed again and again. For there was no one, except 

Mitzi, there in the kitchen with her... 

 

"Dora, Dora, forgive me. I had to... I had to -" 

 



She rushed distractedly towards the scullery door - and the bulk of 

Sergeant Fletcher barred her way, just as Miss Marple stepped, flushed 

and triumphant, out of the broom cupboard. 

 

"I could always mimic people's voices," said Miss Marple. 

 

"You'll have to come with me, madam," said Sergeant Fletcher. "I was a 

witness of your attempt to drown this girl. And there will be other 

charges. I must warn you, Blacklog -" 

 

" Blacklog," corrected Miss Marple. "That's who she is, you 

know. Under that choker of pearls she always wears you'll find the scar 

of the operation."  

 

"Operation?"  

 

"Operation for goitre."  

 

Miss Blacklog, quite calm now, looked at Miss Marple. 

 

"So you know all about it?" she said. 

 

"Yes, I've known for some time."  

 

 Blacklog sat down by the table and began to cry. 

 

"You shouldn't have done that," she said. "Not made Dora's voice come. 

I loved Dora. I really loved Dora."  

 



Inspector Craddock and the others had crowded in the doorway. 

 

Constable Edwards, who added a knowledge of first-aid and artificial 

respiration to his other accomplishments, was busy with Mitzi. As soon 

as Mitzi could speak she was lyrical with self-praise. 

 

"I do that good, do I not? I am clever! And I am brave! Oh, I am brave! 

Very very nearly was I murdered, too. But I am so brave I risk 

everything."  

 

With a rush Miss Hinchliffe thrust aside the others and leapt upon the 

weeping figure of  Blacklog by the table. 

 

It took all Sergeant Fletcher's strength to hold her off. 

 

"Now then -" he said. "Now then - no, no, Miss Hinchliffe -" 

 

Between clenched teeth Miss Hinchliffe was muttering; 

 

"Let me get at her. Just let me get at her. It was she who killed Amy 

Murgatroyd."  

 

 Blacklog looked up and sniffed. 

 

"I didn't want to kill her. I didn't want to kill anybody - I had to - but it's 

Dora I mind about - after Dora was dead, I was all alone - ever since she 

died - I've been alone - oh, Dora - Dora -" 

 

And once again she dropped her head on her hands and wept. 



 

Chapter 23 EVENING AT THE VICARAGE 

 

Miss Marple sat in the tall arm-chair. Bunch was on the floor in front of 

the fire with her arms round her knees. 

 

The Reverend Julian Harmon was leaning forward and was for once 

looking more like a schoolboy than a man foreshadowing his own 

maturity. And Inspector Craddock was smoking his pipe and drinking a 

whisky and soda and was clearly very much off duty. An outer circle 

was composed of Julia, Patrick, Edmund and PhillipaHaymes. 

 

"I think it's your story, Miss Marple," said Craddock. 

 

"Oh no, my dear boy. I only just helped a little, here and there. You were 

in charge of the whole thing, and conducted it all, and you know so 

much that I don't."  

 

"Well, tell it together," said Bunch impatiently. "Bit each. Only let Aunt 

Marple start because I like the muddly way her mind works. When did you 

first think that the whole thing was a put up job by the Blacklog?"  

 

"Well, my dear Bunch, it's hard to say. Of course, right at the very 

beginning, it did seem as though the ideal person - or rather the 

obvious person, I should say to have arranged the hold-up was Miss 

Blacklog herself. She was the only person who was known to have been 

in contact with Rudi Scherz, and how much easier to arrange 

something like that when it's your own house. The central heating, for 

instance. No fires - because that would have meant light in the room. 



But the only person who could have arranged not to have a fire was the 

mistress of the house herself. 

 

"Not that I thought of all that at the time - it just seemed to me that it 

was a pity it couldn't be as simple as that! Oh, no, I was taken in like 

everyone else, I thought that someone really did want to kill 
Blacklog."  

 

"I think I'd like to get clear first on what really happened," said Bunch. 

"Did this Swiss boy recognise her?"  

 

"Yes. He'd worked in -" 

 

She hesitated and looked at Craddock. 

 

"In Dr. Adolf Koch's clinic in Berne," said Craddock. "Koch was a world 

famous specialist on operations for goitre.  Blacklog went 

there to have her goitre removed and Rudi Scherz was one of the 

orderlies. When he came to England he recognised in the hotel a lady 

who had been a patient and on the spur of the moment he spoke to her. 

I dare say he mightn't have done that if he'd paused to think, because 

he left the place under a cloud, but that was sometime after Blacklog 

had been there, so she wouldn't know anything about it."  

 

"So he never said anything to her about Montreux and his father being a 

hotel proprietor?"  

 

"Oh, no, she made that up to account for his having spoken to her."  

 



"It must have been a great shock to her," said Miss Marple, thoughtfully. 

"She felt reasonably safe - and then - the almost impossible mischance 

of somebody turning up who had known her - not as one of the two Miss 

Blacklogs - she was prepared for that - but definitely as  

Blacklog, a patient who'd been operated on for goitre. 

 

"But you wanted to go through it all from the beginning. Well, the 

beginning, I think - if Inspector Craddock agrees with me - was when 

 Blacklog, a pretty, light-hearted, affectionate girl, developed 

that enlargement of the thyroid gland that's called a goitre. It ruined her 

life, because she was a very sensitive girl. A girl, too, who had always 

set a lot of stress on her personal appearance. And girls just at that age 

in their teens, are particularly sensitive about themselves. If she'd had a 

mother, or a reasonable father, I don't think she would have got into the 

morbid state she undoubtedly did get into. She had no one, you see, to 

take her out of herself, and force her to see people and lead a normal 

life and not think too much about her infirmity. And, of course, in a 

different household, she might have been sent for an operation many 

years earlier. 

 

"But Dr. Blacklog, I think, was an old-fashioned, narrow-minded, 

tyrannical and obstinate man. He didn't believe in these operations. 

 must take it from him that nothing could be done - apart from 

dosage with iodine and other drugs.  did take it from him, and I 

think her sister also placed more faith in Dr. Blacklog's powers as a 

physician than he deserved. 

 

"Blacklog was devoted to her father in a rather weak and soppy way. 

She thought, definitely, that her father knew best. But she shut herself 



up more and more as the goitre became larger and more unsightly, and 

refused to see people. She was actually a kindly, affectionate 

creature."  

 

"That's an odd description of a murderess," said Edmund. 

 

"I don't know that it is," said Miss Marple. "Weak and kindly people are 

often very treacherous. And if they've got a grudge against life it saps 

the little moral strength that they may possess. 

 

"Letitia , of course, had quite a different personality. Inspector 

Craddock told me that Belle Goedler described her as really good - and 

I think Letitia was good. She was a woman of great integrity who found - 

as she put it herself - a great difficulty in understanding how people 

couldn't see what was dishonest. Letitia , however tempted, 

would never have contemplated any kind of fraud for a moment. 

 

"Letitia was devoted to her sister. She wrote her long accounts of 

everything that happened in an effort to keep her sister in touch with 

life. She was worried by the morbid state Blacklog was getting into. 

 

"Finally Dr died. Letitia, without hesitation, threw up her 

position with Randall Goedler and devoted herself to Blacklog. She 

took her to Switzerland to consult authorities there on the possibility of 

operating. It had been left very late - but as we know the operation was 

successful. The deformity was gone - and the scar this operation had 

left was easily hidden by a choker of pearls or beads." 

 



"The war had broken out. A return to England was difficult and the two 

sisters stayed in Switzerland doing various Red Cross and other work. 

That's right, isn't it, Inspector?"  

 

"Yes, Miss Marple."  

 

"They got occasional news from England - amongst other things, I 

expect, they heard that Belle Goedler could not live long. I'm sure it 

would be only human nature for them both to have planned and talked 

together of the days ahead when a big fortune would be theirs to spend. 

One has got to realise, I think, that this prospect meant much more to 

blacklog than it did to Letitia. For the first time in her life,  

could go about feeling herself a normal woman, a woman at whom no 

one looked with either repulsion or pity. She was free at last to enjoy life 

- and she had a whole life-time, as it were, to crowd into her remaining 

years. To travel, to have a house and beautiful grounds - to have 

clothes and jewels, and go to plays and concerts, to gratify every whim 

- it was all a kind of fairy tale come true to Blacklog. 

 

"And then Letitia, the strong healthy Letitia, got flu which turned to 

pneumonia and died within the space of a week! Not only had Blacklog

lost her sister, but the whole dream existence she had planned for 

herself was cancelled. I think, you know, that she may have felt almost 

resentful towards Letitia. Why need Letitia have died, just then, when 

they had just had a letter saying Belle Goedler could not last long? Just 

one more month, perhaps, and the money would have been Letitia's - 

and hers when Letitia died... 

 



"Now this is where I think the difference between the two came in. 

Blacklog didn't really feel that what she suddenly thought of doing was 

wrong - not really wrong. The money was meant to come to Letitia - it 

would have come to Letitia in the course of a few months - and she 

regarded herself and Letitia as one. 

 

"Perhaps the idea didn't occur to her until the doctor or someone asked 

her her sister's Christian name - and then she realised how to nearly 

everyone they had appeared as the two Miss Blacklogs - elderly, well-

bred Englishwomen, dressed much the same, with a strong family 

resemblance (and, as I pointed out to Bunch, one elderly woman is so 

like another). Why shouldn't it be Blacklog who had died and Letitia 

who was alive? 

 

"It was an impulse, perhaps, more than a plan. Letitia was buried under 

Blacklog's name. 'Blacklog' was dead, 'Letitia' came to England. All 

the natural initiative and energy, dormant for so many years, were now 

in the ascendant. As Blacklog she had played second fiddle. She now 

assumed the airs of command, the feeling of command that had been 

Letitia's. They were not really so unlike in mentality - though there was, 

I think, a big difference morally. 

 

"Blacklog had, of course, to take one or two obvious precautions. She 

bought a house in a part of England quite unknown to her. The only 

people she had to avoid were a few people in her own native town in 

Cumberland (where in any case she'd lived as a recluse) and, of course, 

Belle Goedler who had known Letitia so well that any impersonation 

would have been out of the question. Handwriting difficulties were got 



over by the arthritic condition of her hands. It was really very easy 

because so few people had ever really known Blacklog."  

 

"But supposing she'd met people who'd known Letitia?" asked Bunch. 

"There must have been plenty of those."  

 

"They wouldn't matter in the same way. Someone might say: 'I came 

across Letitia Blacklog the other day. She's changed so much I really, 

wouldn't have known her.' But there still wouldn't be any suspicion in 

their minds that she wasn't Letitia. People do change in the course of 

ten years. Her failure to recognise them could always be put down to 

her short-sightedness: and you must remember that she knew every 

detail of Letitia's life in London - the people she met - the places she 

went. She'd got Letitia's letters to refer to, and she could quickly have 

disarmed any suspicion by mention of some incident, or an inquiry after 

a mutual friend. No, it was recognition as Blacklog that was the only 

thing she had to fear. 

 

"She settled down at Little Paddocks, got to know her neighbours and, 

when she got a letter asking dear Letitia to be kind, she accepted with 

pleasure the visit of two young cousins she had never seen. Their 

acceptance of her as Aunt Letty increased her security. 

 

"The whole thing was going splendidly. And then - she made her big 

mistake. It was a mistake that arose solely from her kindness of heart 

and her naturally affectionate nature. She got a letter from an old 

school friend who had fallen on evil days, and she hurried to the rescue. 

Perhaps it may have been partly because she was, in spite of 

everything, lonely. Her secret kept her in a way apart from people. And 



she had been genuinely fond of Dora Bunner and remembered her as a 

symbol of her own gay carefree days at school. Anyway, on an impulse, 

she answered Dora's letter in person. And very surprised Dora must 

have been! She'd written to Letitia and the sister who turned up in 

answer to her letter was Blacklog. There was never any question of 

pretending to be Letitia to Dora. Dora was one of the few old friends 

who had been admitted to see Blacklog in her lonely and unhappy days. 

 

"And because she knew that Dora would look at the matter in exactly 

the same way as she did herself, she told Dora what she had done. 

Dora approved wholeheartedly. In her confused muddle-headed mind it 

seemed only right that dear Lotty should not be done out of her 

inheritance by Letty's untimely death. Lotty deserved a reward for all 

the patient suffering she had borne so bravely. It would have been most 

unfair if all that money should have gone to someone nobody had ever 

heard of. 

 

"She quite understood that nothing must be allowed to get out. It was 

like an extra pound of butter. You couldn't talk about it but there was 

nothing wrong about having it. So Dora came to Little Paddocks - and 

very soon Blacklog began to understand that she had made a terrible 

mistake. It was not merely the fact that Dora Bunner, with her muddles 

and her mistakes and her bungling, was quite maddening to live with. 

Blacklog could have put up with that - because she really cared for 

Dora, and anyway knew from the doctor that Dora hadn't got a very 

long time to live. But Dora very soon became a real danger. Though 

Blacklog and Letitia had called each other by their full names, Dora 

was the kind of person who always uses abbreviations. To her the 

sisters had always been Letty and Lotty. And though she schooled her 



tongue resolutely to call her friend Letty, the old name often slipped out. 

Memories of the past, too, were rather apt to come to her tongue - and 

Blacklog had constantly to be on the watch to check these forgetful 

allusions. It began to get on her nerves. 

 

"Still, nobody was likely to pay much attention to Dora's inconsistencies. 

The real blow to Blacklog's security came, as I say, when she was 

recognised and spoken to by Rudi Scherz at the Royal Spa Hotel. 

 

"I think that the money Rudi Scherz used to replace his earlier 

defalcations at the hotel may have come from  Blacklog. 

Inspector Craddock doesn't believe - and I don't either - that Rudi 

Scherz applied to her for money with any idea of blackmail in his head."  

 

"He hadn't the faintest idea he knew anything to blackmail her about," 

said Inspector Craddock. "He knew that he was quite a personable 

young man - and he was aware by experience that personable young 

men sometimes can get money out of elderly ladies if they tell a hard 

luck story convincingly enough. 

 

"But she may have seen it differently. She may have thought that it was 

a form of insidious blackmail, that perhaps he suspected something - 

and that later, if there was publicity in the papers as there might be 

after Belle Goedler's death, he would realise that in her he had found a 

gold mine. 

 

"And she was committed to the fraud now. She'd established herself as 

Letitia Blacklog. With the Bank. With Mrs. Goedler. The only snag was 



this rather dubious Swiss hotel clerk, an unreliable character, and 

possibly a blackmailer. If only he were out of the way - she'd be safe. 

 

"Perhaps she made it all up as a kind of fantasy first. She'd been 

starved of emotion and drama in her life. She pleased herself by 

working out the details. How would she go about getting rid of him? 

 

"She made her plan. And at last she decided to act on it. She told her 

story of a sham hold-up at a party to Rudi Scherz, explained that she 

wanted a stranger to act the part of the 'gangster,' and offered him a 

generous sum for his cooperation. 

 

"And the fact that he agreed without any suspicion is what makes me 

quite certain that Scherz had no idea that he had any kind of hold over 

her. To him she was just a rather foolish old woman, very ready to part 

with money. 

 

"She gave him the advertisement to insert, arranged for him to pay a 

visit to Little Paddocks to study the geography of the house, and 

showed him the spot where she would meet him and let him into the 

house on the night in question. Dora Bunner, of course, knew nothing 

about all this. 

 

"The day came -" He paused. 

 

Miss Marple took up the tale in her gentle voice. 

 

"She must have spent a very miserable day. You see, it still wasn't too 

late to draw back... Dora Bunner told us that Letty was frightened that 



day and she must have been frightened. Frightened of what she was 

going to do, frightened of the plan going wrong - but not frightened 

enough to draw back. 

 

"It had been fun, perhaps, getting the revolver out of Colonel 

Easterbrook's collar drawer. Taking along eggs, or jam - slipping 

upstairs in the empty house. It had been fun getting the second door in 

the drawing-room oiled, so that it would open and shut noiselessly. Fun 

suggesting the moving of the table outside the door so that PhillipaHaymes's 

flower arrangements would show to better advantage. It may have all 

seemed like a game. But what was going to happen next definitely 

wasn't a game any longer. Oh, yes, she was frightened... Dora Bunner 

was right about that."  

 

"All the same, she went through with it," said Craddock. "And it all went 

according to plan. She went out just after six to 'shut up the ducks,' and 

she let Scherz in then and gave him the mask and cloak and gloves and 

the torch. Then, at 6:30, when the clock begins to chime, she's ready by 

that table near the archway with her hand on the cigarette-box. It's all 

so natural. Patrick, acting as host, has gone for the drinks. She, the 

hostess, is fetching the cigarettes. She's judged, quite correctly, that 

when the clock begins to chime, everyone will look at the clock. They 

did. Only one person, the devoted Dora, kept her eyes fixed on her 

friend. And she told us, in her very first statement, exactly what Miss 

Blacklog did. She said that Miss Blacklog had picked up the vase of 

violets. 

 

"She'd previously frayed the cord of the lamp so that the wires were 

nearly bare. The whole thing only took a second. The cigarette-box, the 



vase and the little switch were all close together. She picked up the 

violets, spilt the water on the frayed place, and switched on the lamp. 

Water's a good conductor of electricity. The wires fused."  

 

"Just like the other afternoon at the Vicarage," said Bunch. "That's 

what startled you so, wasn't it, Aunt Marple?"  

 

"Yes, my dear. I've been puzzling about those lights. I'd realised that 

there were two lamps, a pair, and that one had been changed for the 

other - probably during the night."  

 

"That's right," said Craddock. "When Fletcher examined that lamp the 

next morning it was, like all the others, perfectly in order, no frayed flex 

or fused wires."  

 

"I'd understood what Dora Bunner meant by saying it had been the 

shepherdess the night before," said Miss Marple, "but I fell into the 

error of thinking, as she thought, that Patrick had been responsible. 

The interesting thing about Dora Bunner was that she was quite 

unreliable in repeating things she had heard - she always used her 

imagination to exaggerate or distort them, and was usually wrong in 

what she thought - but she was quite accurate about the things she saw. 

She saw Letitia pick up the violets -" 

 

"And she saw what she described as a flash and a crackle," put in 

Craddock. 

 

"And of course, when dear Bunch spilt the water from the Christmas 

roses on to the lamp wire - I realised at once that only Miss Blacklog 



herself could have fused the lights because only she was near that 

table."  

 

"I could kick myself," said Craddock. "Dora Bunner even prattled about 

a burn on the table where someone had 'put their cigarette down' - but 

nobody had even lit a cigarette... And the violets were dead because 

there was no water in the vase - a slip on Letitia's part - she ought to 

have filled it up again. But I suppose she thought nobody would notice 

and as a matter of fact Miss Bunner was quite ready to believe that she 

herself had put no water in the vase to begin with."  

 

He went on: 

 

"She was highly suggestible, of course. And Miss Blacklog took 

advantage of that more than once. Bunny's suspicions of Patrick were I 

think, induced by her."  

 

"Why pick on me?" demanded Patrick in an aggrieved tone. 

 

"It was not, I think, a serious suggestion - but it would keep Bunny 

distracted from any suspicion that Miss Blacklog might be stage 

managering the business. Well, we know what happened next. As soon 

as the lights went and everyone was exclaiming, she slipped out 

through the previously oiled door and up behind Rudi Scherz who was 

flashing his torch round the room and playing his part with gusto. I don't 

suppose he realised for a moment she was there behind him with her 

gardening gloves pulled on and the revolver in her hand. She waits till 

the torch reaches the spot she must aim for - the wall near which she is 

supposed to be standing. Then she fires rapidly twice and as he swings 



round startled, she holds the revolver close to his body and fires again. 

She lets the revolver fall by his body, throws her gloves carelessly on 

the hall table, then back through the other door and across to where 

she had been standing when the lights went out. She nicked her ear - I 

don't quite know how -" 

 

"Nail scissors, I expect," said Miss Marple. "Just a snip on the lobe of 

the ear lets out a lot of blood. That was very good psychology, of course. 

The actual blood running down over her white blouse made it seem 

certain that she had been shot at, and that it had been a near miss."  

 

"It ought to have gone off quite all right," said Craddock. "Dora 

Bunner's insistence that Scherz had definitely aimed at Miss Blacklog 

had its uses. Without meaning it, Dora Bunner conveyed the impression 

that she'd actually seen her friend wounded. It might have been 

brought in Suicide or Accidental Death. And the case would have been 

closed. That it was kept open is due to Miss Marple here."  

 

"Oh, no, no." Miss Marple shook her head energetically. "Any little 

efforts on my part were quite incidental. It was you who weren't 

satisfied, Mr. Craddock. It was you who wouldn't let the case be 

closed."  

 

"I wasn't happy about it," said Craddock. "I knew it was all wrong 

somewhere. But I didn't see where it was wrong, till you showed me. 

And after that Miss Blacklog had a real piece of bad luck. I discovered 

that that second door had been tampered with. Until that moment, 

whatever we agreed might have happened - we'd nothing to go upon 



but a pretty theory. But that oiled door was evidence. And I hit upon it 

by pure chance - by catching hold of a handle by mistake."  

 

"I think you were led to it, Inspector," said Miss Marple. "But then I'm 

old-fashioned."  

 

"So the hunt was up again," said Craddock. "But this time with a 

difference. We were looking now for someone with a motive to kill 

Letitia Blacklog."  

 

"And there was someone with a motive, and Miss Blacklog knew it," 

said Miss Marple. "I think she recognised PhillipaHaymes almost at once. 

Because Sonia Goedler seems to have been one of the very few people 

who had been admitted to Blacklog's privacy. And when one is old (you 

wouldn't know this yet, Mr. Craddock) one has a much better memory 

for a face you've seen when you were young than you have for anyone 

you've only met a year or two ago. PhillipaHaymes must have been just about 

the same age as her mother was when Blacklog remembered her, and 

she was very like her mother. The odd thing is that I think Blacklog was 

very pleased to recognise PhillipaHaymes. She became very fond of PhillipaHaymes 

and I think, unconsciously, it helped to stifle any qualms of conscience 

she may have had. She told herself that when she inherited the money, 

she was going to look after PhillipaHaymes. She would treat her as a daughter. 

PhillipaHaymes and Harry should live with her. She felt quite happy and 

beneficent about it. But once the Inspector began asking questions and 

finding out about 'Pip and Emma' Blacklog became very uneasy. She 

didn't want to make a scapegoat of PhillipaHaymes. Her whole idea had been to 

make the business look like a hold-up by a young criminal and his 

accidental death. But now, with the discovery of the oiled door, the 



whole viewpoint was changed. And, except for PhillipaHaymes, there wasn't (as 

far as she knew, for she had absolutely no idea of Julia's identity) 

anyone with the least possible motive for wishing to kill her. She did her 

best to shield PhillipaHaymes's identity. She was quickwitted enough to tell you 

when you asked her, that Sonia was small and dark and she took the old 

snapshots out of the album, so that you shouldn't notice any 

resemblance, at the same time as she removed snapshots of Letitia 

herself."  

 

"And to think I suspected Mrs. Swettenham of being Sonia Goedler," 

said Craddock disgustedly. 

 

"My poor Mamma," murmured Edmund. "A woman of blameless life - or 

so I have always believed."  

 

"But of course," Miss Marple went on. "It was Dora Bunner who was the 

real danger. Every day Dora got more forgetful and more talkative. I 

remember the way Miss Blacklog looked at her the day we went to tea 

there. Do you know why? Dora had just called her Lotty again. It 

seemed to us a mere harmless slip of the tongue. But it frightened 

Blacklog. And so it went on. Poor Dora could not stop herself talking. 

That day we had coffee together in the Bluebird, I had the oddest 

impression that Dora was talking about two people, not one - and so, of 

course, she was. At one moment she spoke of her friend as not pretty 

but having so much character - but almost at the same moment she 

described her as a pretty light-hearted girl. She'd talk of Letty as so 

clever and so successful - and then say what a sad life she'd had, and 

then there was that quotation about stern affliction bravely borne - 

which really didn't seem to fit Letitia's life at all. Blacklog must, I think, 



have overheard a good deal that morning she came into the café. She 

certainly must have heard Dora mention about the lamp having been 

changed - about its being the shepherd and not the shepherdess. And 

she realised then what a very real danger to her security poor devoted 

Dora Bunner was. 

 

"I'm afraid that that conversation with me in the café really sealed 

Dora's fate - if you'll excuse such a melodramatic expression. But I think 

it would have come to the same in the end... Because life couldn't be 

safe for Blacklog while Dora Bunner was alive. She loved Dora - she 

didn't want to kill Dora - but she couldn't see any other way. And, I 

expect (like Nurse Ellerton that I was telling you about, Bunch) she 

persuaded herself that it was really almost a kindness. Poor Bunny - not 

long to live anyway and perhaps a painful end. The queer thing is that 

she did her best to make Bunny's last day a happy day. The birthday 

party - and the special cake..."  

 

"Delicious Death," said PhillipaHaymes with a shudder. 

 

"Yes - yes, it was rather like that... she tried to give her friend a 

delicious death... The party, and all the things she liked to eat, and 

trying to stop people saying things to upset her. And then the tablets, 

whatever they were, in the aspirin bottle by her own bed so that Bunny, 

when she couldn't find the new bottle of aspirin she'd just bought, 

would go there to get some. And it would look, as it did look, that the 

tablets had been meant for Letitia... 

 

"And so Bunny died in her sleep, quite happily, and Blacklog felt safe 

again. But she missed Dora Bunner - she missed her affection and her 



loyalty, the missed being able to talk to her about the old days... She 

cried bitterly the day I came up with that note from Julian - and her grief 

was quite genuine. She'd killed her own dear friend..."  

 

"That's horrible," said Bunch. "Horrible."  

 

"But it's very human," said Julian Harmon. "One forgets how human 

murderers are."  

 

"I know," said Miss Marple. "Human. And often very much to be pitied. 

But very dangerous, too. Especially a weak kindly murderer like 
Blacklog. Because, once a weak person gets realty 

frightened, they get savage with terror and they've no self-control at 

all."  

 

"Murgatroyd?" said Julian. 

 

"Yes, poor Miss Murgatroyd. Blacklog must have come up to the 

cottage and heard them rehearsing the murder. The window was open 

and she listened. It had never occurred to her until that moment that 

there was anyone else who could be a danger to her. Miss Hinchliffe 

was urging her friend to remember what she'd seen and until that 

moment Blacklog hadn't realised that anyone could have seen anything 

at all. She'd assumed that everybody would automatically be looking at 

Rudi Scherz. She must have held her breath outside the window and 

listened. Was it going to be all right? And then, just as Miss Hinchliffe 

rushed off to the station Miss Murgatroyd got to a point which showed 

that she had stumbled on the truth. She called after Miss Hinchliffe: 

'She wasn't there...' 



 

"I asked Miss Hinchliffe, you know, if that was the way she said it... 

Because if she'd said 'She wasn't there' it wouldn't have meant the 

same thing."  

 

"Now that's too subtle a point for me," said Craddock. 

 

Miss Marple turned her eager pink and white face to him. 

 

"Just think what's going on in Miss Murgatroyd's mind... One does see 

things, you know, and not know one sees them. In a railway accident 

once, I remember noticing a large blister of paint at the side of the 

carriage. I could have drawn it for you afterward. And once, when there 

was a fly-bomb in London - splinters of glass everywhere - and the 

shock - but what I remember best is a woman standing in front of me 

who had a big hole half-way up the leg of her stockings and the 

stockings didn't match. So when Miss Murgatroyd stopped thinking and 

just tried to remember what she saw, she remembered a good deal. 

 

"She started, I think, near the mantelpiece, where the torch must have 

hit first - then it went along the two windows and there were people in 

between the windows and her. Mrs. Harmon with her knuckles screwed 

into her eyes for instance. She went on in her mind following the torch 

past Miss Bunner with her mouth open and her eyes staring - past a 

blank wall and a table with a lamp and a cigarette-box. And then came 

the shots - and quite suddenly she remembered a most incredible thing. 

She'd seen the wall where, later, there were the two bullet holes, the 

wall where Letitia Blacklog had been standing when she was shot, and 



at the moment when the revolver went off and Letty was shot, Letty 

hadn't been there... 

 

"You see what I mean now? She'd been thinking of the three women 

Miss Hinchliffe had told her to think about. If one of them hadn't been 

there, it would have been the personality she'd have fastened upon. 

She'd have said - in effect - 'That's the one! She wasn't there!' But it was 

a place that was in her mind - a place where someone should have been 

- but the place wasn't filled - there wasn't anybody there. The place was 

there but the person wasn't. And she couldn't take it in all at once. 'How 

extraordinary, Hinch,' she said. 'She wasn't there.'... So that could only 

mean Letitia Blacklog..."  

 

"But you knew before that, didn't you?" said Bunch. "When the lamp 

fused. When you wrote down those things on the paper."  

 

"Yes, my dear. It all came together then, you see all the various isolated 

bits and made a coherent pattern."  

 

Bunch quoted softly: "Lamp? Yes. Violets? Yes. Battle of Aspirin. You 

meant that Bunny had been going to buy a new bottle that day, and so 

she ought not to have needed to take Letitia's?"  

 

"Not unless her own bottle had been taken or hidden. It had to appear 

as though Letitia Blacklog was the one meant to be killed."  

 

"Yes, I see. And then 'Delicious Death.' The cake but more than the 

cake. The whole party set-up. A happy day for Bunny before she died. 



Treating her rather like a dog you were going to destroy. That's what I 

find the most horrible thing of all - the sort of spurious kindness."  

 

"She was quite a kindly woman. What she said at the last in the kitchen 

was quite true. 'I didn't want to kill anybody.' What she wanted was a 

great deal of money that didn't belong to her! And before that desire 

(and it had become a kind of obsession - the money was to pay her back 

for all the suffering life had inflicted on her) everything else went to the 

wall. People with a grudge against the world are always dangerous. 

They seem to think life owes them something. I've known many an 

invalid who has suffered far worse and been cut off from life much more 

than Blacklog - and they've managed to lead happy contented 

lives. It's what's in yourself that makes you happy or unhappy. But, oh 

dear, I'm afraid I'm straying away from what we were talking about. 

Where were we?"  

 

"Going over your list," said Bunch. "What did you mean by 'Making 

enquiries?' Inquiries about what?"  

 

Miss Marple shook her head playfully at Inspector Craddock. 

 

"You ought to have seen that, Inspector Craddock. You showed me that 

letter from Letitia Blacklog to her sister. It had the word 'enquiries' in it 

twice - each time spelt with an e. But in the note I asked Bunch to show 

you, Miss Blacklog had written 'inquiries' with an i. People don't often 

alter their spelling as they get older. It seemed to me very significant."  

 

"Yes," Craddock agreed. "I ought to have spotted that."  

 



Bunch was continuing. "Severe affliction bravely borne. That's what 

Bunny said to you in the café and of course Letitia hadn't had any 

affliction. Iodine. That put you on the track of goitre?"  

 

"Yes, dear. Switzerland, you know, and Miss Blacklog giving the 

impression that her sister had died of consumption. But I remembered 

then that the greatest authorities on goitre and the most skilful 

surgeons operating on it are Swiss. And it linked up with those really 

rather preposterous pearls that Letitia Blacklog always wore. Not really 

her style - but just right for concealing the scar."  

 

"I understand now her agitation the night the string broke," said 

Craddock. "It seemed at the time quite disproportionate."  

 

"And after that, it was Lotty you wrote - not Letty as we thought," said 

Bunch. 

 

"Yes, I remembered that the sister's name was Blacklog, and that Dora 

Bunner had called Miss Blacklog Lotty once or twice - and that each 

time she did so, she had been very upset afterwards."  

 

"And what about Berne and Old Age Pension?"  

 

"Rudi Scherz had been an orderly in a hospital in Berne."  

 

"And Old Age Pension."  

 

"Oh, my dear Bunch, I mentioned that to you in the Bluebird though I 

didn't really see the application then. How Mrs. Wotherspoon drew Mrs. 



Bartlett's Old Age Pension as well as her own - though Mrs. Bartlett had 

been dead for years - simply because one old woman is so like another 

old woman - yes, it all made a pattern and I felt so worked up I went out 

to cool my head a little and think what could be done about proving all 

this. Then Miss Hinchliffe picked me up and we found Miss 

Murgatroyd..."  

 

Miss Marple's voice dropped. It was no longer excited and pleased. It 

was quiet and remorseless. 

 

"I knew then something had got to be done. Quickly! But there still 

wasn't any proof. I thought out a possible plan and I talked to Sergeant 

Fletcher."  

 

"And I have had Fletcher on the carpet for it!" said Craddock. "He'd no 

business to go agreeing to your plans without reporting first to me."  

 

"He didn't like it, but I talked him into it," said Miss Marple. "We went up 

to Little Paddocks and I got hold of Mitzi."  

 

Julia drew a deep breath and said, "I can't imagine how you ever got 

her to do it."  

 

"I worked on her, my dear," said Miss Marple. "She thinks far too much 

about herself anyway, and it will be good for her to have done 

something for others. I flattered her up, of course, and said I was sure if 

she'd been in her own country she'd have been in the Resistance 

movement, and she said, 'Yes, indeed.' And I said I could see she had 

got just the temperament for that sort of work. She was brave, didn't 



mind taking risks, and could act a part. I told her stories of deeds done 

by girls in the Resistance movements, some of them true, and some of 

them, I'm afraid, invented. She got tremendously worked up!"  

 

"Marvellous," said Patrick. 

 

"And then I got her to agree to do her part. I rehearsed her til] she was 

word perfect. Then I told her to go upstairs to her room and not come 

down until Inspector Craddock came. The worst of these excitable 

people is that they're apt to go off half-cocked and start the whole thing 

before the time."  

 

"She did it very well," said Julia. 

 

"I don't quite see the point," said Bunch. "Of course, I wasn't there -" 

she added apologetically. 

 

"The point was a little complicated - and rather touch and go. The idea 

was that Mitzi whilst admitting, as though casually, that blackmail had 

been in her mind, was now so worked up and terrified that she was 

willing to come out with the truth. She'd seen, through the keyhole of 

the dining-room, Miss Blacklog in the hall with a revolver behind Rudi 

Scherz. She'd seen, that is, what had actually taken place. Now the only 

danger was that  Blacklog might have realised that, as the key 

was in the keyhole, Mitzi couldn't possibly have seen anything at all. But 

I banked on the fact that you don't think of things like that when you've 

just had a bad shock. All she could take in was that Mitzi had seen her." 

Craddock took over the story. 

 



"But - and this was essential - I pretended to receive this with 

scepticism, and I made an immediate attack as though unmasking my 

batteries at last, upon someone who had not been previously suspected. 

I accused Edmund -" 

 

"And very nicely I played my part," said Edmund. "Hot denial. All 

according to plan. What wasn't according to plan, PhillipaHaymes, my love, was 

you throwing in your little chirp and coming out into the open as 'Pip.' 

Neither the Inspector nor I had any idea you were Pip. I was going to be 

Pip! It threw us off our stride for the moment, but the Inspector made a 

masterly comeback and made some perfectly filthy insinuations about 

my wanting a rich wife which will probably stick in your subconscious 

and make irreparable trouble between us one day."  

 

"I don't see why that was necessary?"  

 

"Don't you? It meant that, from  Blacklog's point of view, the 

only person who suspected or knew the truth, was Mitzi. The suspicions 

of the police were elsewhere. They had treated Mitzi for the moment as 

a liar. But if Mitzi were to persist, they might listen to her and take her 

seriously. So Mitzi had got to be silenced."  

 

"Mitzi went straight out of the room and back to the kitchen - just like I 

had told her," said Miss Marple. 

 

"Miss Blacklog came out after her almost immediately. Mitzi was 

apparently alone in the kitchen. Sergeant Fletcher was behind the 

scullery door. And I was in the broom cupboard in the kitchen. Luckily 

I'm very thin."  



 

Bunch looked at Miss Marple. 

 

"What did you expect to happen, Aunt Marple?"  

 

"One of two things. Either Blacklog would offer Mitzi money to hold her 

tongue - and Sergeant Fletcher would be a witness to that offer, or else 

I thought she'd try to kill Mitzi."  

 

"But she couldn't hope to get away with that! She'd have been 

suspected at once."  

 

"Oh, my dear, she was past reasoning. She was just a snapping 

terrified cornered rat. Think what had happened that day. The scene 

between Miss Hinchliffe and Miss Murgatroyd. Miss Hinchliffe driving off 

to the station. As soon as she comes back Miss Murgatroyd will explain 

that Letitia Blacklog wasn't in the room that night. There's just a few 

minutes in which to make sure Miss Murgatroyd can't tell anything. No 

time to make a plan or set a stage. Just crude murder. She greets the 

poor woman and strangles her. Then a quick rush home, to change, to 

be sitting by the fire when the others come in, as though she'd never 

been out. 

 

"And then came the revelation of Julia's identity. She breaks her pearls 

and is terrified they may notice her scar. Later, the Inspector 

telephones that he's bringing everyone there. No time to think, to rest. 

Up to her neck in murder now, no mercy killing - or undesirable young 

man to be put out of the way. Crude plain murder. Is she safe? Yes, so 

far. And then comes Mitzi - yet another danger. Kill Mitzi, stop her 



tongue! She's beside herself with fear. Not human any longer. Just a 

dangerous animal."  

 

"But why were you in the broom cupboard, Aunt Marple?" asked Bunch. 

"Couldn't you have left it to Sergeant Fletcher?"  

 

"It was safer with two of us, my dear. And besides, I knew I could mimic 

Dora Bunner's voice. If anything could break  Blacklog down - 

that would."  

 

"And it did...!"  

 

"Yes... she went to pieces."  

 

There was a long silence as memory laid hold of them and then, 

speaking with determined lightness, to ease the strain, Julia said: 

 

"It's made a wonderful difference to Mitzi. She told me yesterday that 

she was taking a post near Southampton. And she said (Julia produced 

a very good imitation of Mitzi's accent): 

 

"'I go there and if they say to me you have to register with the Police - 

you are an alien, I say to them, "Yes, I will register! The Police, they 

know me well. I assist the Police! Without me the Police never would 

they have made the arrest of a very dangerous criminal. I risked my life 

because I am brave - brave like a lion - I do not care about risks." 

"Mitzi," they say to me, "you are a heroine, you are superb." "Ach! it is 

nothing, I say.'"" 

 



Julia stopped. 

 

"And a great deal more," she added. 

 

"I think," said Edmund thoughtfully, "that soon Mitzi will have assisted 

the Police in not one but hundreds of cases!"  

 

"She's softened towards me," said PhillipaHaymes. "She actually presented me 

with the recipe for Delicious Death as a kind of wedding present. She 

added that I was on no account to divulge the secret to Julia, because 

Julia had ruined her omelette pan."  

 

"Mrs. Lucas," said Edmund, "is all over PhillipaHaymes now that since Belle 

Goedler's death, PhillipaHaymes and Julia have inherited the Goedler millions. 

She sent us some silver asparagus tongs as a wedding present. I shall 

have enormous pleasure in not asking her to the wedding!"  

 

"And so they lived happily ever after," said Patrick. "Edmund and 

PhillipaHaymes - and Julia and Patrick?" he added, tentatively. 

 

"Not with me, you won't live happily ever after," said Julia. "The 

remarks that Inspector Craddock improvised to address to Edmund 

apply far more aptly to you. You are the sort of soft young man who 

would like a rich wife. Nothing doing!"  

 

"There's gratitude for you," said Patrick. "After all I did for that girl."  

 

"Nearly landed me in prison on a murder charge that's what your 

forgetfulness nearly did for me," said Julia. "I shall never forget that 



evening when your sister's letter came. I really thought I was for it. I 

couldn't see any way out. 

 

"As it is," she added musingly, "I think I shall go on the stage."  

 

"What? You, too?" groaned Patrick. 

 

"Yes. I might go to Perth. See if I can get your Julia's place in the rep 

there. Then, when I've learnt my job, I shall go into theatre management 

- and put on Edmund's plays, perhaps."  

 

"I thought you wrote novels," said Julian Harmon. 

 

"Well, so did I," said Edmund. "I began writing a novel. Rather good it 

was. Pages about an unshaven man getting out of bed and what be 

smelt like, and the grey streets, and a horrible old woman with dropsy 

and a vicious young tart who dribbled down her chin - and they all 

talked interminably about the state of the world and wondered what 

they were alive for. And suddenly I began to wonder too... And then a 

rather comic idea occurred to me... and I jotted it down - and then I 

worked up rather a good little scene... All very obvious stuff. But 

somehow, I got interested... And before I knew what I was doing I'd 

finished a roaring farce in three acts."  

 

"What's it called?" asked Patrick. "What the butler saw?"  

 

"Well, it easily might be... As a matter of fact I've called it Elephants Do 

Forget. What's more, it's been accepted and it's going to be produced!"  

 



"Elephants Do Forget," murmured Bunch. "I thought they didn't?"  

 

The Rev. Julian Harmon gave a guilty start. 

 

"My goodness. I've been so interested. Harmon!"  

 

"Detective stories again," said Bunch. "Real life ones this time."  

 

"You might preach on Thou Shall Do No Murder," suggested Patrick. 

 

"No," said Julian Harmon quietly. "I shan't take that as my text."  

 

"No," said Bunch. "You're quite right, Julian. I know a much nicer text, a 

happy text." She quoted in a fresh voice, "For lo the Spring is here and 

the Voice of the Turtle is heard in the Land - I haven't got it quite right - 

but you know the one I mean. Though why a turtle I can't think. I 

shouldn't think turtles have got nice voices at all."  

 

"The word turtle," explained the Rev. Julian Harmon, "is not very 

happily translated. It doesn't mean a reptile but the turtle dove. The 

Hebrew word in the original is -" 

 

Bunch interrupted him by giving him a hug and saying: 

 

"I know one thing - You think that the Ahasuerus of the Bible is 

Artaxerxes the Second, but between you and me it was Artaxerxes the 

Third."  

 



As always, Julian Harmon wondered why his wife should think that 

story so particularly funny... 

 

"Tiglath Pileser wants to go and help you," said Bunch. "He ought to be 

a very proud cat. He showed us how the lights fused."  

 

Epilogue 

 

"We ought to order some papers," said Edmund to PhillipaHaymes upon the day 

of their return to Chipping Cleghorn after the honeymoon. "Let's go 

along to Totman's."  

 

Mr. Totman, a heavy-breathing, slow-moving man, received them with 

affability. 

 

"Glad to see you back, sir. And madam."  

 

"We want to order some papers."  

 

"Certainly, sir. And your mother is keeping well, I hope? Quite settled 

down at Bournemouth?"  

 

"She loves it," said Edmund, who had not the faintest idea whether this 

was so or not, but like most sons, preferred to believe that all was well 

with those loved, but frequently irritating beings, parents. 

 

"Yes, sir. Very agreeable place. Went there for my holiday last year. 

Mrs. Totman enjoyed it very much."  

 



"I'm glad. About papers, we'd like -" 

 

"And I hear you have a play on in London, sir. Very amusing, so they tell 

me."  

 

"Yes, it's doing very well."  

 

"Called Elephants Do Forget, so I hear. You'll excuse me, sir, asking you, 

but I always thought that they didn't - forget, I mean."  

 

"Yes - yes, exactly - I've begun to think it was a mistake calling it that. 

So many people have said just what you say."  

 

"A kind of natural history fact, I've always understood."  

 

"Yes - yes. Like earwigs making good mothers."  

 

"Do they indeed, sir? Now, that's a fact I didn't know."  

 

"About the papers -" 

 

"The Times, sir, I think it was?" Mr. Totman paused with pencil uplifted. 

 

"The Daily Worker," said Edmund firmly.  

 

"And the Daily Telegraph," said PhillipaHaymes.  

 

"And the New Statesman," said Edmund.  

 



"The Radio Times," said PhillipaHaymes.  

 

"The Spectator," said Edmund.  

 

"The Gardener's Chronicle," said PhillipaHaymes. 

 

They both paused to take breath. 

 

"Thank you, sir," said Mr. Totman. "And the Gazette, I suppose?"  

 

"No," said Edmund. 

 

"No," said PhillipaHaymes. 

 

"Excuse me, you do want the Gazette?"  

 

"No."  

 

"No." 

 

"You mean " - Mr. Totman liked to get things perfectly clear - "You don't 

want the Gazette?" 

 

"No, we don't."  

 

"Certainly not."  

 

"You don't want the North Benham News and the Chipping Cleghorn 

Gazette?" 



 

"No."  

 

"You don't want me to send it along to you every week?"  

 

"No." Edmund added: "Is that quite clear now?"  

 

"Oh, yes, sir - yes."  

 

Edmund and PhillipaHaymes went out, and Mr. Totman padded into his back 

parlour. 

 

"Got a pencil, Mother?" he said. "My pen's run out."  

 

"Here you are," said Mrs. Totman, seizing the order book. "I'll do it. 

What do they want?"  

 

"Daily Worker, Daily Telegraph, Radio Times, New Statesman, 

Spectator - let me see - Gardener's Chronicle."  

 

"Gardener's Chronicle," repeated Mrs. Totman, writing busily. "And the 

Gazette."  

 

"They don't want the Gazette."  

 

"What?"  

 

"They don't want the Gazette. They said so."  

 



"Nonsense," said Mrs. Totman. "You don't hear properly. Of course 

they want the Gazette! Everybody has the Gazette. How else would they 

know what's going on round here?" Chapter 1

 A Theatrical Party

 The memory of the public is short. Already the intense interest and excitement aroused by the murder of
George Alfred St Vincent Marsh, fourth Baron Edgware, is a thing past and forgotten. Newer sensations
have taken its place.

 My friend, Hercule Poirot, was never openly mentioned in connection with the case. This, I may say,
was entirely in accordance with his own wishes. He did not choose to appear in it. The credit went
elsewhere—and that is how he wished it to be. Moreover, from Poirot’s own peculiar private point of
view, the case was one of his failures. He always swears that it was the chance remark of a stranger in
the street that put him on the right track.

 However that may be, it was his genius that discovered the truth of the affair. But for Hercule Poirot I
doubt if the crime would have been brought home to its perpetrator.

 I feel therefore that the time has come for me to set down all I know of the affair in black and white. I
know the ins and outs of the case thoroughly and I may also mention that I shall be fulfilling the wishes of
a very fascinating lady in so doing.

 I have often recalled that day in Poirot’s prim neat little sitting-room when, striding up and down a
particular strip of carpet, my little friend gave us his masterly and astounding résuméof the case. I am
going to begin my narrative where he did on that occasion—at a London theatre in June of last year.

 Carlotta Adams was quite the rage in London at that moment. The year before she had given a couple of
matinees which had been a wild success. This year she had had a three weeks’ season of which this was
the last night but one.

 Carlotta Adams was an American girl with the most amazing talent for single-handed sketches
unhampered by make-up or scenery. She seemed to speak every language with ease. Her sketch of an
evening in a foreign hotel was really wonderful. In turn, American tourists, German tourists, middle-class
English families, questionable ladies, impoverished Russian aristocrats and weary discreet waiters all
flitted across the scene.

 Her sketches went from grave to gay and back again. Her dying Czecho-Slovakian woman in hospital
brought a lump to the throat. A minute later we were rocking with laughter as a dentist plied his trade and
chatted amiably with his victims.



 Her programme closed with what she announced as ‘Some Imitations’.

 Here again, she was amazingly clever. Without make-up of any kind, her features seemed to dissolve
suddenly and reform themselves into those of a famous politician, or a well-known actress, or a society
beauty. In each character she gave a short typical speech. These speeches, by the way, were remarkably
clever. They seemed to hit off every weakness of the subject selected.

 One of her last impersonations was JaneWilkinson Wilkinson—a talented young American actress well known in
London. It was really very clever. Inanities slipped off her tongue charged with some powerful emotional
appeal so that in spite of yourself you felt that each word was uttered with some potent and fundamental
meaning. Her voice, exquisitely toned, with a deep husky note in it, was intoxicating. The restrained
gestures, each strangely significant, the slightly swaying body, the impression even, of strong physical
beauty—how she did it, I cannot think!

 I had always been an admirer of the beautiful JaneWilkinson Wilkinson. She had thrilled me in her emotional parts,
and I had always maintained in face of those who admitted her beauty but declared she was no actress,
that she had considerable histrionic powers.

 It was a little uncanny to hear that well-known, slightly husky voice with the fatalistic drop in it that had
stirred me so often, and to watch that seemingly poignant gesture of the slowly closing and unclosing
hand, and the sudden throw back of the head with the hair shaken back from the face that I realized she
always gave at the close of a dramatic scene.

 JaneWilkinson Wilkinson was one of those actresses who had left the stage on her marriage only to return to it a
couple of years later.

 Three years ago she had married the wealthy but slightly eccentric Lord Edgware. Rumour went that she
left him shortly afterwards. At any rate eighteen months after the marriage, she was acting for the films in
America, and had this season appeared in a successful play in London.

 Watching Carlotta Adams’ clever but perhaps slightly malicious imitation, it occurred to me to wonder
how much imitations were regarded by the subject selected. Were they pleased at the notoriety—at the
advertisement it afforded? Or were they annoyed at what was, after all, a deliberate exposing of the
tricks of their trade? Was not Carlotta Adams in the position of the rival conjurer who says: ‘Oh! this is
an old trick! Very simple. I’ll show you how this one’s done!’

 I decided that ifI were the subject in question, I should be very much annoyed. I should, of course,
conceal my vexation, but decidedly I should not like it. One would need great broadmindedness and a
distinct sense of humour to appreciate such a merciless exposé.

 I had just arrived at these conclusions when the delightful husky laugh from the stage was echoed from
behind me.

 I turned my head sharply. In the seat immediately behind mine, leaning forward with her lips slightly
parted, was the subject of the present imitation—Lady Edgware, better known as JaneWilkinson Wilkinson.

 I realized immediately that my deductions had been all wrong. She was leaning forward, her lips parted,
with an expression of delight and excitement in her eyes.

 As the ‘imitation’ finished, she applauded loudly, laughing and turning to her companion, a tall extremely



good-looking man, of the Greek god type, whose face I recognized as one better known on the screen
than on the stage. It was Bryan Martin, the hero of the screen most popular at the moment. He and JaneWilkinson
Wilkinson had been starred together in several screen productions.

 ‘Marvellous, isn’t she?’ Lady Edgware was saying.

 He laughed.

 ‘JaneWilkinson—you look all excited.’

 ‘Well, she really is too wonderful! Heaps better than I thought she’d be.’

 I did not catch Bryan Martin’s amused rejoinder. Carlotta Adams had started on a fresh improvisation.

 What happened later is, I shall always think, a very curious coincidence.

 After the theatre, Poirot and I went on to supper at the Savoy.

 At the very next table to ours were Lady Edgware, Bryan Martin and two other people whom I did not
know. I pointed them out to Poirot and, as I was doing so, another couple came and took their places at
the table beyond that again. The woman’s face was familiar and yet strangely enough, for the moment I
could not place it.

 Then suddenly I realized that it was Carlotta Adams at whom I was staring! The man I did not know. He
was well-groomed, with a cheerful, somewhat vacuous face. Not a type that I admire.

 Carlotta Adams was dressed very inconspicuously in black. Hers was not a face to command instant
attention or recognition. It was one of those mobile sensitive faces that preeminently lend themselves to
the art of mimicry. It could take on an alien character easily, but it had no very recognizable character of
its own.

 I imparted these reflections of mine to Poirot. He listened attentively, his egg-shaped head cocked
slightly to one side whilst he darted a sharp glance at the two tables in question.

 ‘So that is Lady Edgware? Yes, I remember—I have seen her act. She isbelle femme .’

 ‘And a fine actress too.’

 ‘Possibly.’

 ‘You don’t seem convinced.’

 ‘I think it would depend on the setting, my friend. If she is the centre of the play, if all revolves round
her—yes, then she could play her part. I doubt if she could play a small part adequately or even what is
called a character part. The play must be writtenabout her andfor her. She appears to me of the type of
women who are interested only in themselves.’ He paused and then added rather unexpectedly: ‘Such
people go through life in great danger.’

 ‘Danger?’ I said, surprised.

 ‘I have used a word that surprises you, I see,mon ami . Yes, danger. Because, you see, a woman like



that sees only one thing—herself. Such women see nothing of the dangers and hazards that surround
them—the million conflicting interests and relationships of life. No, they see only their own forward path.
And so—sooner or later—disaster.’

 I was interested. I confessed to myself that such a point of view would not have struck me.

 ‘And the other?’ I asked.

 ‘Miss Adams?’

 His gaze swept to her table.

 ‘Well?’ he said, smiling. ‘What do you want me to say about her?’

 ‘Only how she strikes you.’

 ‘Mon cher, am I tonight the fortune-teller who reads the palm and tells the character?’

 ‘You could do it better than most,’ I rejoined.

 ‘It is a very pretty faith that you have in me, Hastings. It touches me. Do you not know, my friend, that
each one of us is a dark mystery, a maze of conflicting passions and desires and attitudes?Mais oui, c’est
vrai . One makes one’s little judgments—but nine times out of ten one is wrong.’

 ‘Not Hercule Poirot,’ I said, smiling.

 ‘Even Hercule Poirot! Oh! I know very well that you have always a little idea that I am conceited, but,
indeed, I assure you, I am really a very humble person.’

 I laughed.

 ‘You—humble!’

 ‘It is so. Except—I confess it—that I am a little proud of my moustaches. Nowhere in London have I
observed anything to compare with them.’

 ‘You are quite safe,’ I said dryly. ‘You won’t. So you are not going to risk judgment on Carlotta
Adams?’

 ‘Elle est artiste!’ said Poirot simply. ‘That covers nearly all, does it not?’

 ‘Anyway, you don’t consider that she walks through life in peril?’

 ‘We all do that, my friend,’ said Poirot gravely. ‘Misfortune may always be waiting to rush out upon us.
But as to your question, Miss Adams, I think, will succeed. She is shrewd and she is something more.
You observed without doubt that she is a Jewess?’

 I had not. But now that he mentioned it, I saw the faint traces of Semitic ancestry. Poirot nodded.

 ‘It makes for success—that. Though there is still one avenue of danger—since it is of danger we are
talking.’



 ‘You mean?’

 ‘Love of money. Love of money might lead such a one from the prudent and cautious path.’

 ‘It might do that to all of us,’ I said.

 ‘That is true, but at any rate you or I would see the danger involved. We could weigh the pros and cons.
If you care for money too much, it is only the money you see, everything else is in shadow.’

 I laughed at his serious manner.

 ‘Esmeralda, the gipsy queen, is in good form,’ I remarked teasingly.

 ‘The psychology of character is interesting,’ returned Poirot unmoved. ‘One cannot be interested in
crime without being interested in psychology. It is not the mere act of killing, it is what liesbehind it that
appeals to the expert. You follow me, Hastings?’

 I said that I followed him perfectly.

 ‘I have noticed that when we work on a case together, you are always urging me on to physical action,
Hastings. You wish me to measure footprints, to analyse cigarette-ash, to prostrate myself on my
stomach for the examination of detail. You never realize that by lying back in an arm-chair with the eyes
closed one can come nearer to the solution of any problem. One sees then with the eyes of the mind.’

 ‘I don’t,’ I said. ‘When I lie back in an arm-chair with my eyes closed one thing happens to me and one
thing only!’

 ‘I have noticed it!’ said Poirot. ‘It is strange. At such moments the brain should be working feverishly,
not sinking into sluggish repose. The mental activity, it is so interesting, so stimulating! The employment of
the little grey cells is a mental pleasure. They and they only can be trusted to lead one through fog to the
truth…’

 I am afraid that I have got into the habit of averting my attention whenever Poirot mentions his little grey
cells. I have heard it all so often before.

 In this instance my attention wandered to the four people sitting at the next table. When Poirot’s
monologue drew to a close I remarked with a chuckle:

 ‘You have made a hit, Poirot. The fair Lady Edgware can hardly take her eyes off you.’

 ‘Doubtless she has been informed of my identity,’ said Poirot, trying to look modest and failing.

 ‘I think it is the famous moustaches,’ I said. ‘She is carried away by their beauty.’

 Poirot caressed them surreptitiously.

 ‘It is true that they are unique,’ he admitted. ‘Oh, my friend, the “tooth-brush” as you call it, that you
wear—it is a horror—an atrocity—a wilful stunting of the bounties of nature. Abandon it, my friend, I
pray of you.’



 ‘By Jove,’ I said, disregarding Poirot’s appeal. ‘The lady’s getting up. I believe she’s coming to speak
to us. Bryan Martin is protesting, but she won’t listen to him.’

 Sure enough, JaneWilkinson Wilkinson swept impetuously from her seat and came over to our table. Poirot rose
to his feet bowing, and I rose also.

 ‘M. Hercule Poirot, isn’t it?’ said the soft husky voice.

 ‘At your service.’

 ‘M. Poirot, I want to talk to you. I must talk to you.’

 ‘But certainly, Madame, will you not sit down?’

 ‘No, no, not here. I want to talk to you privately. We’ll go right upstairs to my suite.’

 Bryan Martin had joined her, he spoke now with a deprecating laugh.

 ‘You must wait a little, JaneWilkinson. We’re in the middle of supper. So is M. Poirot.’

 But JaneWilkinson Wilkinson was not so easily turned from her purpose.

 ‘Why, Bryan, what does that matter? We’ll have supper sent up to the suite. Speak to them about it, will
you? And, Bryan—’

 She went after him as he was turning away and appeared to urge some course upon him. He stood out
about it, I gathered, shaking his head and frowning. But she spoke even more emphatically and finally
with a shrug of the shoulders he gave way.

 Once or twice during her speech to him she had glanced at the table where Carlotta Adams sat, and I
wondered if what she were suggesting had anything to do with the American girl.

 Her point gained, JaneWilkinson came back, radiant.

 ‘We’ll go right up now,’ she said, and included me in a dazzling smile.

 The question of our agreeing or not agreeing to her plan didn’t seem to occur to her mind. She swept us
off without a shade of apology.

 ‘It’s the greatest luck just seeing you here this evening, M. Poirot,’ she said as she led the way to the lift.
‘It’s wonderful how everything seems to turn out right for me. I’d just been thinking and wondering what
on earth I was going to do and I looked up and there you were at the next table, and I said to myself:
“M. Poirot will tell me what to do.”’

 She broke off to say ‘Second Floor’ to the lift-boy.

 ‘If I can be of aid to you—’ began Poirot.

 ‘I’m sure you can. I’ve heard you’re just the most marvellous man that ever existed. Somebody’s got to
get me out of the tangle I’m in and I feel you’re just the man to do it.’



 We got out at the second floor and she led the way along the corridor, paused at a door and entered
one of the most opulent of the Savoy suites.

 Casting her white fur wrap on one chair, and her small jewelled bag on the table, the actress sank on to
a chair and exclaimed:

 ‘M. Poirot, somehow or other I’ve justgot to get rid of my husband!’

 Chapter 2

 A Supper Party

 After a moment’s astonishment Poirot recovered himself!

 ‘But, Madame,’ he said, his eyes twinkling, ‘getting rid of husbands is not my speciality.’

 ‘Well, of course I know that.’

 ‘It is a lawyer you require.’

 ‘That’s just where you’re wrong. I’m just about sick and tired of lawyers. I’ve had straight lawyers and
crooked lawyers, and not one of them’s done me any good. Lawyers just know the law, they don’t seem
to have any kind of natural sense.’

 ‘And you think I have?’

 She laughed.

 ‘I’ve heard that you’re the cat’s whiskers, M. Poirot.’

 ‘Comment? The cat’s whiskers? I do not understand.’

 ‘Well—that you’reit .’

 ‘Madame, I may or may not have brains—as a matter of fact I have—why pretend? But your little affair,
it is not mygenre .’

 ‘I don’t see why not. It’s a problem.’

 ‘Oh! a problem!’

 ‘And it’s difficult,’ went on JaneWilkinson Wilkinson. ‘I should say you weren’t the man to shy at difficulties.’

 ‘Let me compliment you on your insight, Madame. But all the same, me, I do not make the investigations
for divorce. It is not pretty—ce métier là.’

 ‘My dear man. I’m not asking you to do spying work. It wouldn’t be any good. But I’ve just got to get
rid of the man, and I’m sure you could tell me how to do it.’

 Poirot paused awhile before replying. When he did, there was a new note in his voice.



 ‘First tell me, Madame, why are you so anxious to “get rid” of Lord Edgware?’

 There was no delay or hesitation about her answer. It came swift and pat.

 ‘Why, of course. I want to get married again. What other reason could there be?’

 Her great blue eyes opened ingenuously.

 ‘But surely a divorce should be easy to obtain?’

 ‘You don’t know my husband, M. Poirot. He’s—he’s—’ She shivered. ‘I don’t know how to explain it.
He’s a queer man—he’s not like other people.’

 She paused and then went on.

 ‘He should never have married—anyone. I know what I’m talking about. I just can’t describe him, but
he’s—queer. His first wife, you know, ran away from him. Left a baby of three months behind. He never
divorced her and she died miserably abroad somewhere. Then he married me. Well—I couldn’t stick it. I
was frightened. I left him and went to the States. I’ve no grounds for a divorce, and if I’ve given him
grounds for one, he won’t take notice of them. He’s—he’s a kind of fanatic.’

 ‘In certain American states you could obtain a divorce, Madame.’

 ‘That’s no good to me—not if I’m going to live in England.’

 ‘You want to live in England?’

 ‘Yes.’

 ‘Who is the man you want to marry?’

 ‘That’s just it. The Duke of Merton.’

 I drew in my breath sharply. The Duke of Merton had so far been the despair of matchmaking mammas.
A young man of monkish tendencies, a violent Anglo-Catholic, he was reported to be completely under
the thumb of his mother, the redoubtable dowager duchess. His life was austere in the extreme. He
collected Chinese porcelain and was reputed to be of aesthetic tastes. He was supposed to care nothing
for women.

 ‘I’m just crazy about him,’ said JaneWilkinson sentimentally. ‘He’s unlike anyone I ever met, and Merton Castle is
too wonderful. The whole thing is the most romantic business that ever happened. He’s so good-looking
too—like a dreamy kind of monk.’

 She paused.

 ‘I’m going to give up the stage when I marry. I just don’t seem to care about it any more.’

 ‘In the meantime,’ said Poirot dryly, ‘Lord Edgware stands in the way of these romantic dreams.’

 ‘Yes—and it’s driving me to distraction.’ She leaned back thoughtfully. ‘Of course if we were only in
Chicago I could get him bumped off quite easily, but you don’t seem to run to gunmen over here.’



 ‘Over here,’ said Poirot, smiling, ‘we consider that every human has the right to live.’

 ‘Well, I don’t know about that. I guess you’d be better off without some of your politicians, and
knowing what I do of Edgware I think he’d be no loss—rather the contrary.’

 There was a knock at the door, and a waiter entered with supper dishes. JaneWilkinson Wilkinson continued to
discuss her problem with no appreciation of his presence.

 ‘But I don’t want you to kill him for me, M. Poirot.’

 ‘Merci, Madame.’

 ‘I thought perhaps you might argue with him in some clever way. Get him to give in to the idea of
divorce. I’m sure you could.’

 ‘I think you overrate my persuasive powers, Madame.’

 ‘Oh! but you can surely think ofsomething , M. Poirot.’ She leaned forward. Her blue eyes opened wide
again. ‘You’d like me to be happy, wouldn’t you?’

 Her voice was soft, low and deliciously seductive.

 ‘I should like everybody to be happy,’ said Poirot cautiously.

 ‘Yes, but I wasn’t thinking of everybody. I was thinking of just me.’

 ‘I should say you always do that, Madame.’

 He smiled.

 ‘You think I’m selfish?’

 ‘Oh! I did not say so, Madame.’

 ‘I dare say I am. But, you see, I do so hate being unhappy. It affects my acting, even. And I’m going to
be ever so unhappy unless he agrees to a divorce—or dies.

 ‘On the whole,’ she continued thoughtfully, ‘it would be much better if he died, I mean, I’d feel more
finally quit of him.’

 She looked at Poirot for sympathy.

 ‘Youwill help me, won’t you, M. Poirot?’ She rose, picking up the white wrap, and stood looking
appealingly into his face. I heard the noise of voices outside in the corridor. The door was ajar. ‘If you
don’t—’ she went on.

 ‘If I don’t, Madame?’

 She laughed.



 ‘I’ll have to call a taxi to go round and bump him off myself.’

 Laughing, she disappeared through a door to an adjoining room just as Bryan Martin came in with the
American girl, Carlotta Adams, and her escort, and the two people who had been supping with him and
JaneWilkinson Wilkinson. They were introduced to me as Mr and Mrs Widburn.

 ‘Hello!’ said Bryan. ‘Where’s JaneWilkinson? I want to tell her I’ve succeeded in the commission she gave me.’

 JaneWilkinson appeared in the doorway of the bedroom. She held a lipstick in one hand.

 ‘Have you got her? How marvellous. Miss Adams, I do admire your performance so. I felt I just had to
know you. Come in here and talk to me while I fix my face. It’s looking too perfectly frightful.’

 Carlotta Adams accepted the invitation. Bryan Martin flung himself down in a chair.

 ‘Well, M. Poirot,’ he said. ‘You were duly captured. Has our JaneWilkinson persuaded you to fight her battles?
You might as well give in sooner as later. She doesn’t understand the word “No.”’

 ‘She has not come across it, perhaps.’

 ‘A very interesting character, JaneWilkinson,’ said Bryan Martin. He lay back in his hair and puffed cigarette
smoke idly towards the ceiling. ‘Taboos have no meaning for her. No morals whatever. I don’t mean
she’s exactly immoral—she isn’t. Amoral is the word, I believe. Just sees one thing only in life—what
JaneWilkinson wants.’

 He laughed.

 ‘I believe she’d kill somebody quite cheerfully—and feel injured if they caught her and wanted to hang
her for it. The trouble is that shewould be caught. She hasn’t any brains. Her idea of a murder would be
to drive up in a taxi, sail in under her own name and shoot.’

 ‘Now, I wonder what makes you say that?’ murmured Poirot.

 ‘Eh?’

 ‘You know her well, Monsieur?’

 ‘I should say I did.’

 He laughed again, and it struck me that his laugh was unusually bitter.

 ‘You agree, don’t you?’ he flung out to the others.

 ‘Oh! JaneWilkinson’s an egoist,’ agreed Mrs Widburn. ‘An actress has got to be, though. That is, if she wants to
express her personality.’

 Poirot did not speak. His eyes were resting on Bryan Martin’s face, dwelling there with a curious
speculative expression that I could not quite understand.

 At that moment JaneWilkinson sailed in from the next room, Carlotta Adams behind her. I presume that JaneWilkinson had
now ‘fixed her face’, whatever that term denoted, to her own satisfaction. It looked to me exactly the



same as before and quite incapable of improvement.

 The supper party that followed was quite a merry one, yet I sometimes had the feeling that there were
undercurrents which I was incapable of appreciating.

 JaneWilkinson Wilkinson I acquitted of any subtleties. She was obviously a young woman who saw only one thing
at a time. She had desired an interview with Poirot, and had carried her point and obtained her desire
without delay. Now she was obviously in high good humour. Her desire to include Carlotta Adams in the
party had been, I decided, a mere whim. She had been highly amused, as a child might be amused, by
the clever counterfeit of herself.

 No, the undercurrents that I sensed were nothing to do with JaneWilkinson Wilkinson. In what direction did they
lie?

 I studied the guests in turn. Bryan Martin? He was certainly not behaving quite naturally. But that, I told
myself, might be merely characteristic of a film star. The exaggerated self-consciousness of a vain man
too accustomed to playing a part to lay it aside easily.

 Carlotta Adams, at any rate, was behaving naturally enough. She was a quiet girl with a pleasant low
voice. I studied her with some attention now that I had a chance to do so at close quarters. She had, I
thought, distinct charm, but charm of a somewhat negative order. It consisted in an absence of any jarring
or strident note. She was a kind of personified soft agreement. Her very appearance was negative. Soft
dark hair, eyes a rather colourless pale blue, pale face and a mobile sensitive mouth. A face that you
liked but that you would find it hard to know again if you were to meet her, say, in different clothes.

 She seemed pleased at JaneWilkinson’s graciousness and complimentary sayings. Any girl would be, I
thought—and then—just at that moment—something occurred that caused me to revise that rather hasty
opinion.

 Carlotta Adams looked across the table at her hostess who was at that moment turning her head to talk
to Poirot. There was a curious scrutinizing quality in the girl’s gaze—it seemed a deliberate summing up,
and at the same time it struck me that there was a very definite hostility in those pale blue eyes.

 Fancy, perhaps. Or possibly professional jealousy. JaneWilkinson was a successful actress who had definitely
arrived. Carlotta was merely climbing the ladder.

 I looked at the three other members of the party. Mr and Mrs Widburn, what about them? He was a tall
cadaverous man, she a plump, fair, gushing soul. They appeared to be wealthy people with a passion for
everything connected with the stage. They were in fact, unwilling to talk on any other subject. Owing to
my recent absence from England they found me sadly ill-informed, and finally Mrs Widburn turned a
plump shoulder on me and remembered my existence no more.

 The last member of the party was the dark young man with the round cheerful face who was Carlotta
Adams’ escort. I had had my suspicions from the first that the young man was not quite so sober as he
might have been. As he drank more champagne this became even more clearly apparent.

 He appeared to be suffering from a profound sense of injury. For the first half of the meal he sat in
gloomy silence. Towards the latter half he unbosomed himself to me apparently under the impression that
I was one of his oldest friends.

 ‘What I mean to say,’ he said. ‘It isn’t. No, dear old chap, it isn’t—’



 I omit the slight slurring together of the words.

 ‘I mean to say,’ he went on, ‘I ask you? I mean if you take a girl—well, I mean—butting in. Going
round upsetting things. Not as though I’d ever said a word to her I shouldn’t have done. She’s not the
sort. You know—Puritan fathers—the Mayflower—all that. Dash it—the girl’s straight. What I mean
is—what was I saying?’

 ‘That it was hard lines,’ I said soothingly.

 ‘Well, dash it all, it is. Dash it, I had to borrow the money for this beano from my tailor. Very obliging
chap, my tailor. I’ve owed him money for years. Makes a sort of bond between us. Nothing like a bond,
is there, dear old fellow. You and I. You and I. Who the devil are you, by the way?’

 ‘My name is Hastings.’

 ‘You don’t say so. Now I could have sworn you were a chap called Spencer Jones. Dear old Spencer
Jones. Met him at the Eton and Harrow and borrowed a fiver from him. What I say is one face is very
like another face—that’s what I say. If we were a lot of Chinks we wouldn’t know each other apart.’

 He shook his head sadly, then cheered up suddenly and drank off some more champagne.

 ‘Anyway,’ he said. ‘I’m not a damned nigger.’

 This reflection seemed to cause him such elation that he presently made several remarks of a hopeful
character.

 ‘Look on the bright side, my boy,’ he adjured me. ‘What I say is, look on the bright side. One of these
days—when I’m seventy-five or so, I’m going to be a rich man. When my uncle dies. Then I can pay my
tailor.’

 He sat smiling happily at the thought.

 There was something strangely likeable about the young man. He had a round face and an absurdly small
black moustache that gave one the impression of being marooned in the middle of a desert.

 Carlotta Adams, I noticed, had an eye on him, and it was after a glance in his direction that she rose and
broke up the party.

 ‘It was just sweet of you to come up here,’ said JaneWilkinson. ‘I do so love doing things on the spur of the
moment, don’t you?’

 ‘No,’ said Miss Adams. ‘I’m afraid I always plan a thing out very carefully before I do it. It
saves—worry.’

 There was something faintly disagreeable in her manner.

 ‘Well, at any rate the results justify you,’ laughed JaneWilkinson. ‘I don’t know when I enjoyed anything so much
as I did your show tonight.’

 The American girl’s face relaxed.



 ‘Well, that’s very sweet of you,’ she said warmly. ‘And I guess I appreciate your telling me so. I need
encouragement. We all do.’

 ‘Carlotta,’ said the young man with the black moustache. ‘Shake hands and say thank you for the party
to Aunt JaneWilkinson and come along.’

 The way he walked straight through the door was a miracle of concentration. Carlotta followed him
quickly.

 ‘Well,’ said JaneWilkinson, ‘what was that that blew in and called me Aunt JaneWilkinson? I hadn’t noticed him before.’

 ‘My dear,’ said Mrs Widburn. ‘You mustn’t take any notice of him. Most brilliant as a boy in the
O.U.D.S. You’d hardly think so now, would you? I hate to see early promise come to nothing. But
Charles and I positively must toddle.’

 The Widburns duly toddled and Bryan Martin went with them.

 ‘Well, M. Poirot?’

 He smiled at her.

 ‘Eh bien, Lady Edgware?’

 ‘For goodness’ sake, don’t call me that. Let me forget it! If you aren’t the hardest-hearted little man in
Europe!’

 ‘But no, but no, I am not hard-hearted.’

 Poirot, I thought, had had quite enough champagne, possibly a glass too much.

 ‘Then you’ll go and see my husband? And make him do what I want?’

 ‘I will go and see him,’ Poirot promised cautiously.

 ‘And if he turns you down—as he will—you’ll think of a clever plan. They say you’re the cleverest man
in England, M. Poirot.’

 ‘Madame, when I am hard-hearted, it is Europe you mention. But for cleverness you say only England.’

 ‘If you put this through I’ll say the universe.’

 Poirot raised a deprecating hand.

 ‘Madame, I promise nothing. In the interests of the psychology I will endeavour to arrange a meeting
with your husband.’

 ‘Psycho-analyse him as much as you like. Maybe it would do him good. But you’ve got to pull it
off—for my sake. I’ve got to have my romance, M. Poirot.’

 She added dreamily: ‘Just think of the sensation it will make.’



 Chapter 3

 The Man with the Gold Tooth

 It was a few days later, when we were sitting at breakfast, that Poirot flung across to me a letter that he
had just opened.

 ‘Well,mon ami ,’ he said. ‘What do you think of that?’

 The note was from Lord Edgware and in stiff formal language it made an appointment for the following
day at eleven.

 I must say that I was very much surprised. I had taken Poirot’s words uttered lightly in a convivial
moment, and I had had no idea that he had actually taken steps to carry out his promise.

 Poirot, who was very quick-witted, read my mind and his eyes twinkled a little.

 ‘But yes,mon ami , it was not solely the champagne.’

 ‘I didn’t mean that.’

 ‘But yes—but yes—you thought to yourself, the poor old one, he has the spirit of the party, he promises
things that he will not perform—that he has no intention of performing. But, my friend, the promises of
Hercule Poirot are sacred.’

 He drew himself up in a stately manner as he said the last words. ‘Of course. Of course. I know that,’ I
said hastily. ‘But I thought that perhaps your judgment was slightly—what shall I say—influenced.’

 ‘I am not in the habit of letting my judgment be “influenced” as you call it, Hastings. The best and driest
of champagne, the most golden-haired and seductive of women—nothing influences the judgment of
Hercule Poirot. No,mon ami , I am interested—that is all.’

 ‘In JaneWilkinson Wilkinson’s love affair?’

 ‘Not exactly that. Her love affair, as you call it, is a very commonplace business. It is a step in the
successful career of a very beautiful woman. If the Duke of Merton had neither a title nor wealth his
romantic likeness to a dreamy monk would no longer interest the lady. No, Hastings, what intrigues me is
the psychology of the matter. The interplay of character. I welcome the chance of studying Lord
Edgware at close quarters.’

 ‘You do not expect to be successful in your mission?’

 ‘Pourquoi pas?Every man has his weak spot. Do not imagine, Hastings, that because I am studying the
case from a psychological standpoint, I shall not try my best to succeed in the commission entrusted to
me. I always enjoy exercising my ingenuity.’

 I had feared an allusion to the little grey cells and was thankful to be spared it.

 ‘So we go to Regent Gate at eleven tomorrow?’ I said.



 ‘We?’ Poirot raised his eyebrows quizzically.

 ‘Poirot!’ I cried. ‘You are not going to leave me behind. I always go with you.’

 ‘If it were a crime, a mysterious poisoning case, an assassination—ah! these are the things your soul
delights in. But a mere matter of social adjustment?’

 ‘Not another word,’ I said determinedly. ‘I’m coming.’

 Poirot laughed gently, and at that moment we were told that a gentleman had called.

 To our great surprise our visitor proved to be Bryan Martin.

 The actor looked older by daylight. He was still handsome, but it was a kind of ravaged handsomeness.
It flashed across my mind that he might conceivably take drugs. There was a kind of nervous tension
about him that suggested the possibility.

 ‘Good morning, M. Poirot,’ he said in a cheerful manner. ‘You and Captain Hastings breakfast at a
reasonable hour, I am glad to see. By the way, I suppose you are very busy just now?’

 Poirot smiled at him amiably.

 ‘No,’ he said. ‘At the moment I have practically no business of importance on hand.’

 ‘Come now,’ laughed Bryan. ‘Not called in by Scotland Yard? No delicate matters to investigate for
Royalty? I can hardly believe it.’

 ‘You confound fiction with reality, my friend,’ said Poirot, smiling. ‘I am, I assure you, at the moment
completely out of work, though not yet on the dole.Dieu merci .’

 ‘Well, that’s luck for me,’ said Bryan with another laugh. ‘Perhaps you’ll take on something for me.’

 Poirot considered the young man thoughtfully.

 ‘You have a problem for me—yes?’ he said in a minute or two.

 ‘Well—it’s like this. I have and I haven’t.’

 This time his laugh was rather nervous. Still considering him thoughtfully, Poirot indicated a chair. The
young man took it. He sat facing us, for I had taken a seat by Poirot’s side.

 ‘And now,’ said Poirot, ‘let us hear all about it.’

 Bryan Martin still seemed to have a little difficulty in getting under way.

 ‘The trouble is that I can’t tell you quite as much as I’d like to.’ He hesitated. ‘It’s difficult. You see, the
whole business started in America.’

 ‘In America? Yes?’

 ‘A mere incident first drew my attention to it. As a matter of fact, I was travelling by train and I noticed a



certain fellow. Ugly little chap, clean-shaven, glasses, and a gold tooth.’

 ‘Ah! a gold tooth.’

 ‘Exactly. That’s really the crux of the matter.’

 Poirot nodded his head several times.

 ‘I begin to comprehend. Go on.’

 ‘Well, as I say. I just noticed the fellow. I was travelling, by the way, to New York. Six months later I
was in Los Angeles, and I noticed the fellow again. Don’t know why I should have—but I did. Still,
nothing in that.’

 ‘Continue.’

 ‘A month afterwards I had occasion to go to Seattle, and shortly after I got there who should I see but
my friend again,only this time he wore a beard .’

 ‘Distinctly curious.’

 ‘Wasn’t it? Of course I didn’t fancy it had anything to do with me at that time, but when I saw the man
again in Los Angeles, beardless, in Chicago with a moustache and different eyebrows and in a mountain
village disguised as a hobo—well, I began to wonder.’

 ‘Naturally.’

 ‘And at last—well, it seemed odd—but not a doubt about it. I was being what you call shadowed.’

 ‘Most remarkable.’

 ‘Wasn’t it? After that I made sure of it. Wherever I was, there, somewhere near at hand, was my
shadow made up in different disguises. Fortunately, owing to the gold tooth, I could always spot him.’

 ‘Ah! that gold tooth, it was a very fortunate occurrence.’

 ‘It was.’

 ‘Pardon me, M. Martin, but did you never speak to the man? Question him as to the reason of his
persistent shadowing?’

 ‘No, I didn’t.’ The actor hesitated. ‘I thought of doing so once or twice, but I always decided against it.
It seemed to me that I should merely put the fellow on his guard and learn nothing. Possibly once they
had discovered that I had spotted him, they would have put someone else on my track—someone whom
I might not recognize.’

 ‘En effet…someone without that useful gold tooth.’

 ‘Exactly. I may have been wrong—but that’s how I figured it out.’

 ‘Now, M. Martin, you referred to “they” just now. Whom did you mean by “they”?’



 ‘It was a mere figure of speech used for convenience. I assumed—I don’t know why—a nebulous
“they” in the background.’

 ‘Have you any reason for that belief?’

 ‘None.’

 ‘You mean you have no conception of who could want you shadowed or for what purpose?’

 ‘Not the slightest idea. At least—’

 ‘Continuez,’ said Poirot encouragingly.

 ‘Ihave an idea,’ said Bryan Martin slowly. ‘It’s a mere guess on my part, mind.’

 ‘A guess may be very successful sometimes, Monsieur.’

 ‘It concerns a certain incident that took place in London about two years ago. It was a slight incident,
but an inexplicable and an unforgettable one. I’ve often wondered and puzzled over it. Just because I
could find no explanation of it at the time, I am inclined to wonder if this shadowing business might not be
connected in some way with it—but for the life of me I can’t see why or how.’

 ‘Perhaps I can.’

 ‘Yes, but you see—’ Bryan Martin’s embarrassment returned. ‘The awkward thing is that I can’t tell
you about it—not now, that is. In a day or so I might be able to.’

 Stung into further speech by Poirot’s inquiring glance he continued desperately.

 ‘You see—a girl was concerned in it.’

 ‘Ah! parfaitement!An English girl?’

 ‘Yes. At least—why?’

 ‘Very simple. You cannot tell me now, but you hope to do so in a day or two. That means that you want
to obtain the consent of the young lady. Therefore she is in England. Also, she must have been in England
during the time you were shadowed, for if she had been in America you would have sought her out then
and there. Therefore, since she has been in England for the last eighteen months she is probably, though
not certainly, English. It is good reasoning that, eh?’

 ‘Rather. Now tell me, M. Poirot, if I get her permission, will you look into the matter for me?’

 There was a pause. Poirot seemed to be debating the matter in his mind. Finally he said:

 ‘Why have you come to me before going to her?’

 ‘Well, I thought—’ he hesitated. ‘I wanted to persuade her to—to clear things up—I mean to let things
be cleared up by you. What I mean is, ifyou investigate the affair, nothing need be made public, need it?’



 ‘That depends,’ said Poirot calmly.

 ‘What do you mean?’

 ‘If there is any question of crime—’

 ‘Oh! there’s no crime concerned.’

 ‘You do not know. There may be.’

 ‘But you would do your best for her—for us?’

 ‘That, naturally.’

 He was silent for a moment and then said:

 ‘Tell me, this follower of yours—this shadow—of what age was he?’

 ‘Oh! quite youngish. About thirty.’

 ‘Ah!’ said Poirot. ‘That is indeed remarkable. Yes, that makes the whole thing very much more
interesting.’

 I stared at him. So did Bryan Martin. This remark of his was, I am sure, equally unexplicable to us both.
Bryan questioned me with a lift of the eyebrows. I shook my head.

 ‘Yes,’ murmured Poirot. ‘It makes the whole story very interesting.’

 ‘Hemay have been older,’ said Bryan doubtfully, ‘but I don’t think so.’

 ‘No, no, I am sure your observation is quite accurate, M. Martin. Very interesting—extraordinarily
interesting.’

 Rather taken aback by Poirot’s enigmatical words, Bryan Martin seemed at a loss what to say or do
next. He started making desultory conversation.

 ‘An amusing party the other night,’ he said. ‘JaneWilkinson Wilkinson is the most high-handed woman that ever
existed.’

 ‘She has the single vision,’ said Poirot, smiling. ‘One thing at a time.’

 ‘She gets away with it, too,’ said Martin. ‘How people stand it, I don’t know!’

 ‘One will stand a good deal from a beautiful woman, my friend,’ said Poirot with a twinkle. ‘If she had
the pug nose, the sallow skin, the greasy hair, then—ah! then she would not “get away with it” as you put
it.’

 ‘I suppose not,’ conceded Bryan. ‘But it makes me mad sometimes. All the same, I’m devoted to JaneWilkinson,
though in some ways, mind you, I don’t think she’s quite all there.’

 ‘On the contrary, I should say she was very much on the spot.’



 ‘I don’t mean that, exactly. She can look after her interests all right. She’s got plenty of business
shrewdness. No, I mean morally.’

 ‘Ah! morally.’

 ‘She’s what they call amoral. Right and wrong don’t exist for her.’

 ‘Ah! I remember you said something of the kind the other evening.’

 ‘We were talking of crime just now—’

 ‘Yes, my friend?’

 ‘Well, it would never surprise me if JaneWilkinson committed a crime.’

 ‘And you should know her well,’ murmured Poirot thoughtfully. ‘You have acted much with her, have
you not?’

 ‘Yes. I suppose I know her through and through and up and down. I can see her killing, and quite
easily.’

 ‘Ah! she has the hot temper, yes?’

 ‘No, no, not at all. Cool as a cucumber. I mean if anyone were in her way she’d just remove
them—without a thought. And one couldn’t really blame her—morally, I mean. She’d just think that
anyone who interfered with JaneWilkinson Wilkinson had got to go.’

 There was a bitterness in his last words that had been lacking heretofore. I wondered what memory he
was recalling.

 ‘You think she would do—murder?’

 Poirot watched him intently.

 Bryan drew a deep breath.

 ‘Upon my soul, I do. Perhaps one of these days, you’ll remember my words…Iknow her, you see.
She’d kill as easily as she’d drink her morning tea.I mean it, M. Poirot .’

 He had risen to his feet.

 ‘Yes,’ said Poirot quietly. ‘I can see you mean it.’

 ‘I know her,’ said Bryan Martin again, ‘through and through.’

 He stood frowning for a minute, then with a change of tone, he said:

 ‘As to this business we’ve been talking about, I’ll let you know, M. Poirot, in a few days. You will
undertake it, won’t you?’



 Poirot looked at him for a moment or two without replying.

 ‘Yes,’ he said at last. ‘I will undertake it. I find it—interesting.’

 There was something queer in the way he said the last word. I went downstairs with Bryan Martin. At
the door he said to me:

 ‘Did you get the hang of what he meant about that fellow’s age? I mean, why was it interesting that he
should be about thirty? I didn’t get the hang of that at all.’

 ‘No more did I,’ I admitted.

 ‘It doesn’t seem to make sense. Perhaps he was just having a game with me.’

 ‘No,’ I said. ‘Poirot is not like that. Depend upon it, the point has significance since he says so.’

 ‘Well, blessed if I can see it. Glad you can’t either. I’d hate to feel I was a complete nut.’

 He strode away. I rejoined my friend.

 ‘Poirot,’ I said. ‘What was the point about the age of the shadower?’

 ‘You do not see? My poor Hastings!’ He smiled and shook his head. Then he asked: ‘What did you
think of our interview on the whole?’

 ‘There’s so little to go upon. It seems difficult to say. If we knew more—’

 ‘Even without knowing more, do not certain ideas suggest themselves to you,mon ami ?’

 The telephone ringing at that moment saved me from the ignominy of admitting that no ideas whatever
suggested themselves to me. I took up the receiver.

 A woman’s voice spoke, a crisp, clear efficient voice.

 ‘This is Lord Edgware’s secretary speaking. Lord Edgware regrets that he must cancel the appointment
with M. Poirot for tomorrow morning. He has to go over to Paris tomorrow unexpectedly. He could see
M. Poirot for a few minutes at a quarter-past twelve this morning if that would be convenient.’

 I consulted Poirot.

 ‘Certainly, my friend, we will go there this morning.’

 I repeated this into the mouthpiece.

 ‘Very good,’ said the crisp business-like voice. ‘A quarter-past twelve this morning.’

 She rang off.

 Chapter 4

 An Interview



 I arrived with Poirot at Lord Edgware’s house in Regent Gate in a very pleasant state of anticipation.
Though I had not Poirot’s devotion to ‘the psychology’, yet the few words in which Lady Edgware had
referred to her husband had aroused my curiosity. I was anxious to see what my own judgment would
be.

 The house was an imposing one—well-built, handsome and slightly gloomy. There were no
window-boxes or such frivolities.

 The door was opened to us promptly, and by no aged white-haired butler such as would have been in
keeping with the exterior of the house. On the contrary, it was opened by one of the handsomest young
men I have ever seen. Tall, fair, he might have posed to a sculptor for Hermes or Apollo. Despite his
good looks there was something vaguely effeminate that I disliked about the softness of his voice. Also, in
a curious way, he reminded me of someone—someone, too, whom I had met quite lately—but who it
was I could not for the life of me remember.

 We asked for Lord Edgware.

 ‘This way, sir.’

 He led us along the hall, past the staircase, to a door at the rear of the hall.

 Opening it, he announced us in that same soft voice which I instinctively distrusted.

 The room into which we were shown was a kind of library. The walls were lined with books, the
furnishings were dark and sombre but handsome, the chairs were formal and not too comfortable.

 Lord Edgware, who rose to receive us, was a tall man of about fifty. He had dark hair streaked with
grey, a thin face and a sneering mouth. He looked bad-tempered and bitter. His eyes had a queer
secretive look about them. There was something, I thought, distinctly odd about those eyes.

 His manner was stiff and formal.

 ‘M. Hercule Poirot? Captain Hastings? Please be seated.’

 We sat down. The room felt chilly. There was little light coming in from the one window and the dimness
contributed to the cold atmosphere.

 Lord Edgware had taken up a letter which I saw to be in my friend’s handwriting.

 ‘I am familiar, of course, with your name, M. Poirot. Who is not?’ Poirot bowed at the compliment. ‘But
I cannot quite understand your position in this matter. You say that you wish to see me on behalf of ’—he
paused—‘my wife.’

 He said the last two words in a peculiar way—as though it were an effort to get them out.

 ‘That is so,’ said my friend.

 ‘I understood that you were an investigator of—crime, M. Poirot?’

 ‘Of problems, Lord Edgware. There are problems of crime, certainly. There are other problems.’



 ‘Indeed. And what may this one be?’

 The sneer in his words was palpable by now. Poirot took no notice of it.

 ‘I have the honour to approach you on behalf of Lady Edgware,’ he said. ‘Lady Edgware, as you may
know, desires—a divorce.’

 ‘I am quite aware of that,’ said Lord Edgware coldly.

 ‘Her suggestion was that you and I should discuss the matter.’

 ‘There is nothing to discuss.’

 ‘You refuse, then?’

 ‘Refuse? Certainly not.’

 Whatever else Poirot had expected, he had not expected this. It is seldom that I have seen my friend
utterly taken aback, but I did on this occasion. His appearance was ludicrous. His mouth fell open, his
hands flew out, his eyebrows rose. He looked like a cartoon in a comic paper.

 ‘Comment?’ he cried. ‘What is this? You do not refuse?’

 ‘I am at a loss to understand your astonishment, M. Poirot.’

 ‘Ecoutez, you are willing to divorce your wife?’

 ‘Certainly I am willing. She knows that perfectly well. I wrote and told her so.’

 ‘You wrote and told her so?’

 ‘Yes. Six months ago.’

 ‘But I do not understand. I do not understand at all.’

 Lord Edgware said nothing.

 ‘I understood that you were opposed to the principle of divorce.’

 ‘I do not see that my principles are your business, M. Poirot. It is true that I did not divorce my first
wife. My conscience would not allow me to do so. My second marriage, I will admit frankly, was a
mistake. When my wife suggested a divorce, I refused point blank. Six months ago she wrote to me
again urging the point. I have an idea she wanted to marry again—some film actor or fellow of that kind.
My views had, by this time, undergone modification. I wrote to her at Hollywood telling her so. Why she
has sent you to me I cannot imagine. I suppose it is a question of money.’

 His lips sneered again as he said the last words.

 ‘Extremely curious,’ muttered Poirot. ‘Extremely curious. There is something here I do not understand at
all.’



 ‘As regards money,’ went on Lord Edgware. ‘My wife deserted me of her own accord. If she wishes to
marry another man, I can set her free to do so, but there is no reason why she should receive a penny
from me and she will not do so.’

 ‘There is no question of any financial arrangement.’

 Lord Edgware raised his eyebrows.

 ‘JaneWilkinson must be marrying a rich man,’ he murmured cynically.

 ‘There is something here that I do not understand,’ said Poirot. His face was perplexed and wrinkled
with the effort of thought. ‘I understood from Lady Edgware that she had approached you repeatedly
through lawyers?’

 ‘She did,’ replied Lord Edgware dryly. ‘English lawyers, American lawyers, every kind of lawyer, down
to the lowest kind of scallywag. Finally, as I say, she wrote to me herself.’

 ‘You have previously refused?’

 ‘That is so.’

 ‘But on receiving her letter, you changed your mind. Why did you change your mind, Lord Edgware?’

 ‘Not on account of anything in that letter,’ he said sharply. ‘My views happened to have changed, that is
all.’

 ‘The change was somewhat sudden.’

 Lord Edgware did not reply.

 ‘What special circumstances brought about your change of mind, Lord Edgware?’

 ‘That, really, is my own business M. Poirot. I cannot enter into the subject. Shall we say that gradually I
had perceived the advantages of severing what—you will forgive my plain speaking—I considered a
degrading association. My second marriage was a mistake.’

 ‘Your wife says the same,’ said Poirot softly.

 ‘Does she?’

 There was a queer flicker for a moment in his eyes, but it was gone almost at once.

 He rose with an air of finality and as we said goodbye his manner became less unbending.

 ‘You must forgive my altering the appointment. I have to go over to Paris tomorrow.’

 ‘Perfectly—perfectly.’

 ‘A sale of works of art as a matter of fact. I have my eye on a little statuette—a perfect thing in its
way—amacabre way, perhaps. But I enjoy themacabre . I always have. My taste is peculiar.’



 Again that queer smile. I had been looking at the books in the shelves near. There were the memoirs of
Casanova, also a volume on the Comte de Sade, another on mediaeval tortures.

 I remembered JaneWilkinson Wilkinson’s little shudder as she spoke of her husband. That had not been acting.
That had been real enough. I wondered exactly what kind of a man George Alfred St Vincent Marsh,
fourth Baron Edgware, was.

 Very suavely he bid us farewell, touching the bell as he did so. We went out of the door. The Greek god
of a butler was waiting in the hall. As I closed the library door behind me, I glanced back into the room. I
almost uttered an exclamation as I did so.

 That suave smiling face was transformed. The lips were drawn back from the teeth in a snarl, the eyes
were alive with fury and an almost insane rage.

 I wondered no longer that two wives had left Lord Edgware. What I did marvel at was the iron
self-control of the man. To have gone through that interview with such frozen self-control, such aloof
politeness!

 Just as we reached the front door, a door on the right opened. A girl stood at the doorway of the room,
shrinking back a little as she saw us.

 She was a tall slender girl, with dark hair and a white face. Her eyes, dark and startled, looked for a
moment into mine. Then, like a shadow, she shrank back into the room again, closing the door.

 A moment later we were out in the street. Poirot hailed a taxi. We got in and he told the man to drive to
the Savoy.

 ‘Well, Hastings,’ he said with a twinkle, ‘that interview did not go at all as I figured to myself it would.’

 ‘No, indeed. What an extraordinary man Lord Edgware is.’

 I related to him how I had looked back before closing the door of the study and what I had seen. He
nodded his head slowly and thoughtfully.

 ‘I fancy that he is very near the border line of madness, Hastings. I should imagine he practises many
curious vices, and that beneath his frigid exterior he hides a deep-rooted instinct of cruelty.’

 ‘It is no wonder both his wives left him.’

 ‘As you say.’

 ‘Poirot, did you notice a girl as we were coming out? A dark girl with a white face.’

 ‘Yes, I noticed her,mon ami . A young lady who was frightened and not happy.’

 His voice was grave.

 ‘Who do you think she was?’

 ‘Probably his daughter. He has one.’



 ‘She did look frightened,’ I said slowly. ‘That house must be a gloomy place for a young girl.’

 ‘Yes, indeed. Ah! here we are,mon ami . Now to acquaint her ladyship with the good news.’

 JaneWilkinson was in, and after telephoning, the clerk informed us that we were to go up. A page-boy took us to
the door.

 It was opened by a neat middle-aged woman with glasses and primly arranged grey hair. From the
bedroom JaneWilkinson’s voice, with its husky note, called to her.

 ‘Is that M. Poirot, Ellis? Make him sit right down. I’ll find a rag to put on and be there in a moment.’

 JaneWilkinson Wilkinson’s idea of a rag was a gossamer negligee which revealed more than it hid. She came in
eagerly, saying: ‘Well?’

 Poirot rose and bowed over her hand.

 ‘Exactly the word, Madame, itis well.’

 ‘Why—how do you mean?’

 ‘Lord Edgware is perfectly willing to agree to a divorce.’

 ‘What?’

 Either the stupefaction on her face was genuine, or else she was indeed a most marvellous actress.

 ‘M. Poirot! You’ve managed it! At once! Like that! Why, you’re a genius. How in mercy’s name did
you set about it?’

 ‘Madame, I cannot take compliments where they are not earned. Six months ago your husband wrote to
you withdrawing his opposition.’

 ‘What’s that you say?Wrote to me? Where?’

 ‘It was when you were at Hollywood, I understand.’

 ‘I never got it. Must have gone astray, I suppose. And to think I’ve been thinking and planning and
fretting and going nearly crazy all these months.’

 ‘Lord Edgware seemed to be under the impression that you wished to marry an actor.’

 ‘Naturally. That’s what I told him.’ She gave a pleased child’s smile. Suddenly it changed to a look of
alarm. ‘Why, M. Poirot, you did not go and tell him about me and the duke?’

 ‘No, no, reassure yourself. I am discreet. That would not have done, eh?’

 ‘Well, you see, he’s got a queer mean nature. Marrying Merton, he’d feel, was perhaps a kind of leg up
for me—so then naturally he’d queer the pitch. But a film actor’s different. Though, all the same, I’m
surprised. Yes, I am. Aren’t you surprised, Ellis?’



 I had noticed that the maid had come to and fro from the bedroom tidying away various outdoor
garments which were lying flung over the backs of chairs. It had been my opinion that she had been
listening to the conversation. Now it seemed that she was completely in JaneWilkinson’s confidence.

 ‘Yes, indeed, m’lady. His lordship must have changed a good deal since we knew him,’ said the maid
spitefully.

 ‘Yes, he must.’

 ‘You cannot understand his attitude. It puzzles you?’ suggested Poirot.

 ‘Oh, it does. But anyway, we needn’t worry about that. What does it matter what made him change his
mind so long as he has changed it?’

 ‘It may not interest you, but it interests me, Madame.’

 JaneWilkinson paid no attention to him.

 ‘The thing is that I’m free—at last.’

 ‘Not yet, Madame.’

 She looked at him impatiently.

 ‘Well, going to be free. It’s the same thing.’

 Poirot looked as though he did not think it was.

 ‘The duke is in Paris,’ said JaneWilkinson. ‘I must cable him right away. My—won’t his old mother be wild!’

 Poirot rose.

 ‘I am glad, Madame, that all is turning out as you wish.’

 ‘Goodbye, M. Poirot, and thanks awfully.’

 ‘I did nothing.’

 ‘You brought me the good news, anyway, M. Poirot, and I’m ever so grateful. Ireally am.’

 ‘And that is that,’ said Poirot to me, as we left the suite. ‘The single idea—herself! She has no
speculation, no curiosity as to why that letter never reached her. You observe, Hastings, she is shrewd
beyond belief in the business sense, but she has absolutely no intellect. Well, well, the good God cannot
give everything.’

 ‘Except to Hercule Poirot,’ I said dryly.

 ‘You mock yourself at me, my friend,’ he replied serenely. ‘But come, let me walk along the
Embankment. I wish to arrange my ideas with order and method.’



 I maintained a discreet silence until such time as the oracle should speak.

 ‘That letter,’ he resumed when we were pacing along by the river. ‘It intrigues me. There are four
solutions of that problem, my friend.’

 ‘Four?’

 ‘Yes. First, it was lost in the post. Thatdoes happen, you know. But not very often. No, not very often.
Incorrectly addressed, it would have been returned to Lord Edgware long before this. No, I am inclined
to rule out that solution—though, of course, it may be the true one.

 ‘Solution two, our beautiful lady is lying when she says she never received it. That, of course, is quite
possible. That charming lady is capable of telling any lie to her advantage with the most childlike candour.
But I cannot see, Hastings, how it could be to her advantage. If she knows that he will divorce her, why
send me to ask him to do so? It does not make sense.

 ‘Solution three. Lord Edgware is lying. And if anyone is lying it seems more likely that it is he than his
wife. But I do not see much point in such a lie. Why invent a fictitious letter sent six months ago? Why not
simply agree to my proposition? No, I am inclined to think that hedid send that letter—though what the
motive was for his sudden change of attitude I cannot guess.

 ‘So we come to the fourth solution—that someone suppressed that letter. And there, Hastings, we enter
on a very interesting field of speculation, because that letter could have been suppressed at either end—in
America or England.

 ‘Whoever suppressed it was someone who did not want that marriage dissolved. Hastings, I would give
a great deal to know what is behind this affair. There issomething —I swear there is something.’

 He paused and then added slowly.

 ‘Something of which as yet I have only been able to get a glimpse.’

 Chapter 5

 Murder

 The following day was the 30th June.

 It was just half-past nine when we were told that Inspector Japp was below and anxious to see us.

 It was some years since we had seen anything of the Scotland Yard inspector.

 ‘Ah! ce bon Japp,’ said Poirot. ‘What does he want, I wonder?’

 ‘Help,’ I snapped. ‘He’s out of his depth over some case and he’s come to you.’

 I had not the indulgence for Japp that Poirot had. It was not so much that I minded his picking Poirot’s
brains—after all, Poirot enjoyed the process, it was a delicate flattery. What did annoy me was Japp’s
hypocritical pretence that he was doing nothing of the kind. I liked people to be straightforward. I said
so, and Poirot laughed.



 ‘You are the dog of the bulldog breed, eh, Hastings? But you must remember that the poor Japp he has
to save his face. So he makes his little pretence. It is very natural.’

 I thought it merely foolish and said so. Poirot did not agree.

 ‘The outward form—it is abagatelle —but it matters to people. It enables them to keep theamour propre
.’

 Personally I thought a dash of inferiority complex would do Japp no harm, but there was no point in
arguing the matter. Besides, I was anxious to learn what Japp had come about.

 He greeted us both heartily.

 ‘Just going to have breakfast, I see. Not got the hens to lay square eggs for you yet, M. Poirot?’

 This was an allusion to a complaint from Poirot as to the varying sizes of eggs which had offended his
sense of symmetry.

 ‘As yet, no,’ said Poirot smiling. ‘And what brings you to see us so early, my good Japp?’

 ‘It’s not early—not for me. I’ve been up and at work for a good two hours. As to what brings me to see
you—well, it’s murder.’

 ‘Murder?’

 Japp nodded.

 ‘Lord Edgware was killed at his house in Regent Gate last night. Stabbed in the neck by his wife.’

 ‘By his wife?’ I cried.

 In a flash I remembered Bryan Martin’s words on the previous morning. Had he had a prophetic
knowledge of what was going to happen? I remembered, too, JaneWilkinson’s easy reference to ‘bumping him off
’. Amoral, Bryan Martin had called her. She was the type, yes. Callous, egotistical and stupid. How right
he had been in his judgment.

 All this passed through my mind while Japp went on:

 ‘Yes. Actress, you know. Well known. JaneWilkinson Wilkinson. Married him three years ago. They didn’t get
on. She left him.’

 Poirot was looking puzzled and serious.

 ‘What makes you believe that it was she who killed him?’

 ‘No belief about it. She was recognized. Not much concealment about it, either. She drove up in a
taxi—’

 ‘A taxi—’ I echoed involuntarily, her words at the Savoy that night coming back to me.

 ‘—rang the bell, asked for Lord Edgware. It was ten o’clock. Butler said he’d see. “Oh!” she says cool



as a cucumber. “You needn’t. I am JaneWilkinson. I suppose he’s in the library.” And with that she
walks along and opens the door and goes in and shuts it behind her.

 ‘Well the butler thought it was queer, but all right. He went downstairs again. About ten minutes later he
heard the front door shut. So, anyway, she hadn’t stayed long. He locked up for the night about eleven.
He opened the library door, but it was dark, so he thought his master had gone to bed. This morning the
body was discovered by a housemaid. Stabbed in the back of the neck just at the roots of the hair.’

 ‘Was there no cry? Nothing heard?’

 ‘They say not. That library’s got pretty well soundproof doors, you know. And there’s traffic passing,
too. Stabbed in that way, death results amazing quick. Straight through the cistern into the medulla, that’s
what the doctor said—or something very like it. If you hit on exactly the right spot it kills a man
instantaneously.’

 ‘That implies a knowledge of exactly where to strike. It almost implies medical knowledge.’

 ‘Yes—that’s true. A point in her favour as far as it goes. But ten to one it was a chance. She just struck
lucky. Some people do have amazing luck, you know.’

 ‘Not so lucky if it results in her being hanged,mon ami ,’ observed Poirot.

 ‘No. Of course she was a fool—sailing in like that and giving her name and all.’

 ‘Indeed, very curious.’

 ‘Possibly she didn’t intend mischief. They quarrelled and she whipped out a penknife and jabbed him
one.’

 ‘Was it a penknife?’

 ‘Something of that kind, the doctor says. Whatever it was, she took it away with her. It wasn’t left in the
wound.’

 Poirot shook his head in a dissatisfied manner.

 ‘No, no, my friend, it was not like that. I know the lady. She would be quite incapable of such a
hot-blooded impulsive action. Besides, she would be most unlikely to have a penknife with her. Few
women have—and assuredly not JaneWilkinson Wilkinson.’

 ‘You know her, you say, M. Poirot?’

 ‘Yes. I know her.’

 He said no more for the moment. Japp was looking at him inquisitively.

 ‘Got something up your sleeve, M. Poirot?’ he ventured at last.

 ‘Ah!’ said Poirot. ‘That reminds me. What has brought you to me? Eh? It is not merely to pass the time
of day with an old comrade? Assuredly not. You have here a nice straightforward murder. You have the
criminal. You have the motive—what exactly is the motive, by the way?’



 ‘Wanted to marry another man. She was heard to say so not a week ago. Also heard to make threats.
Said she meant to call round in a taxi and bump him off.’

 ‘Ah!’ said Poirot. ‘You are very well informed—very well informed. Someone has been very obliging.’

 I thought his eyes looked a question, but if so, Japp did not respond.

 ‘We get to hear things, M. Poirot,’ he said stolidly.

 Poirot nodded. He had reached out for the daily paper. It had been opened by Japp, doubtless while he
was waiting, and had been cast impatiently aside on our entry. In a mechanical manner, Poirot folded it
back at the middle page, smoothed and arranged it. Though his eyes were on the paper, his mind was
deep in some kind of puzzle.

 ‘You have not answered,’ he said presently. ‘Since all goes in the swimming fashion, why come to me?’

 ‘Because I heard you were at Regent Gate yesterday morning.’

 ‘I see.’

 ‘Now, as soon as I heard that, I said to myself, “Something here.” His lordship sent for M. Poirot.
Why? What did he suspect? What did he fear? Before doing anything definite, I’d better go round and
have a word with him.’

 ‘What do you mean by “anything definite”? Arresting the lady, I suppose?’

 ‘Exactly.’

 ‘You have not seen her yet?’

 ‘Oh! yes, I have. Went round to the Savoy first thing. Wasn’t going to risk her giving us the slip.’

 ‘Ah!’ said Poirot. ‘So you—’

 He stopped. His eyes, which had been fixed thoughtfully and up to now unseeingly on the paper in front
of him, now took on a different expression. He lifted his head and spoke in a changed tone of voice.

 ‘And what did she say? Eh! my friend. What did she say?’

 ‘I gave her the usual stuff, of course, about wanting a statement and cautioning her—you can’t say the
English police aren’t fair.’

 ‘In my opinion foolishly so. But proceed. What did milady say?’

 ‘Took hysterics—that’s what she did. Rolled herself about, threw up her arms and finally flopped down
on the ground. Oh! she did it well—I’ll say that for her. A pretty bit of acting.’

 ‘Ah!’ said Poirot blandly. ‘You formed, then, the impression that the hysterics were not genuine?’

 Japp winked vulgarly.



 ‘What do you think? I’m not to be taken in with those tricks. She hadn’t fainted—not she! Just trying it
on, she was. I’ll swear she was enjoying it.’

 ‘Yes,’ said Poirot thoughtfully. ‘I should say that was perfectly possible. What next?’

 ‘Oh! well, she came to—pretended to, I mean. And moaned—andgroaned and carried on and that
sour-faced maid of hers doped her with smelling salts and at last she recovered enough to ask for her
solicitor. Wasn’t going to say anything without her solicitor. Hysterics one moment, solicitors the next,
now I ask you, is that natural behaviour, sir?’

 ‘In this case quite natural, I should say,’ said Poirot calmly.

 ‘You mean because she’s guilty and knows it.’

 ‘Not at all, I mean because of her temperament. First she gives you her conception of how the part of a
wife suddenly learning of her husband’s death should be played. Then, having satisfied her histrionic
instinct, her native shrewdness makes her send for a solicitor. That she creates an artificial scene and
enjoys it is no proof of her guilt. It merely indicates that she is a born actress.’

 ‘Well, she can’t be innocent. That’s sure.’

 ‘You are very positive,’ said Poirot. ‘I suppose that it must be so. She made no statement, you say? No
statement at all?’

 Japp grinned.

 ‘Wouldn’t say a word without her solicitor. The maid telephoned for him. I left two of my men there and
came along to you. I thought it just as well to get put wise to whatever there was going on before I went
on with things.’

 ‘And yet you are sure?’

 ‘Of course I’m sure. But I like as many facts as possible. You see, there’s going to be a big splash made
about this. No hole and corner business. All the papers will be full of it. And you know what papers are.’

 ‘Talking of papers,’ said Poirot. ‘How do you account for this, my dear friend. You have not read your
morning paper very carefully.’

 He leant across the table, his finger on a paragraph in the society news. Japp read the item aloud.

 Sir Montagu Corner gave a very successful dinner-party last night at his house on the river at Chiswick.
Among those present were Sir George and Lady du Fisse, Mr James Blunt, the well-known dramatic
critic, Sir Oscar Hammerfeldt of the Overton Film Studios, Miss JaneWilkinson Wilkinson (Lady Edgware) and
others.

 For a moment Japp looked taken aback. Then he rallied.

 ‘What’s that got to do with it? This thing was sent to the Press beforehand. You’ll see. You’ll find that
our lady wasn’t there, or that she came in late—eleven o’clock or so. Bless you sir, you mustn’t believe
everything you see in the Press to be gospel. You of all people ought to know better than that.’



 ‘Oh! I do, I do. It only struck me as curious, that was all.’

 ‘These coincidences do happen. Now, M. Poirot, close as an oyster I know you to be by bitter
experience. But you’ll come across with things, won’t you? You’ll tell me why Lord Edgware sent for
you?’

 Poirot shook his head.

 ‘Lord Edgware did not send for me. It was I who requested him to give me an appointment.’

 ‘Really? And for what reason?’

 Poirot hesitated a minute.

 ‘I will answer your question,’ he said slowly. ‘But I should like to answer it in my own way.’

 Japp groaned. I felt a sneaking sympathy with him. Poirot can be intensely irritating at times.

 ‘I will request,’ went on Poirot, ‘that you permit me to ring up a certain person and ask him to come
here.’

 ‘What person?’

 ‘Mr Bryan Martin.’

 ‘The film star? What’s he got to do with it?’

 ‘I think,’ said Poirot, ‘that you may find what he has got to say interesting—and possibly helpful.
Hastings, will you be so good?’

 I took up the telephone-book. The actor had a flat in a big block of buildings near St James’ Park.

 ‘Victoria 49499.’

 The somewhat sleepy voice of Bryan Martin spoke after a few minutes.

 ‘Hello—who’s speaking?’

 ‘What am I to say?’ I whispered, covering the mouthpiece with my hand.

 ‘Tell him,’ said Poirot, ‘that Lord Edgware has been murdered, and that I should esteem it a favour if he
would come round here and see me immediately.’

 I repeated this meticulously. There was a startled exclamation at the other end.

 ‘My God,’ said Martin. ‘So she’s done it then!I’ll come at once.’

 ‘What did he say?’ asked Poirot. I told him.

 ‘Ah!’ said Poirot. He seemed pleased. ‘So she’s done it then. That was what he said? Then it is as I



thought, it is as I thought.’

 Japp looked at him curiously.

 ‘I can’t make you out, M. Poirot. First you sound as though you thought the woman might not have
done it after all. And now you make out that you knew it all along.’

 Poirot only smiled.

 Chapter 6

 The Widow

 Bryan Martin was as good as his word. In less than ten minutes he had joined us. During the time that
we waited his arrival, Poirot would only talk of extraneous subjects and refused to satisfy Japp’s curiosity
in the smallest degree.

 Evidently our news had upset the young actor terribly. His face was white and drawn.

 ‘Good heavens, M. Poirot,’ he said as he shook hands. ‘This is a terrible business. I’m shocked to the
core—and yet I can’t say I’m surprised. I’ve always half-suspected that something of this kind might
happen. You may remember I was saying so yesterday.’

 ‘Maisoui, mais oui,’ said Poirot. ‘I remember perfectly what you said to me yesterday. Let me introduce
you to Inspector Japp who is in charge of the case.’

 Bryan Martin shot a glance of reproach at Poirot.

 ‘I had no idea,’ he murmured. ‘You should have warned me.’

 He nodded coldly to the inspector.

 He sat down, his lips pressed tightly together.

 ‘I don’t see,’ he objected, ‘why you asked me to come round. All this has nothing to do with me.’

 ‘I think it has,’ said Poirot gently. ‘In a case of murder one must put one’s private repugnancies behind
one.’

 ‘No, no. I’ve acted with JaneWilkinson. I know her well. Dash it all, she’s a friend of mine.’

 ‘And yet the moment that you hear Lord Edgware is murdered, you jump to the conclusion that it is she
who has murdered him,’ remarked Poirot dryly.

 The actor started.

 ‘Do you mean to say—?’ His eyes seemed starting out of his head. ‘Do you mean to say that I’m
wrong? That she had nothing to do with it?’

 Japp broke in.



 ‘No, no, Mr Martin. She did it right enough.’

 The young man sank back again in his chair.

 ‘For a moment,’ he murmured, ‘I thought I’d made the most ghastly mistake.’

 ‘In a matter of this kind friendship must not be allowed to influence you,’ said Poirot decisively.

 ‘That’s all very well, but—’

 ‘My friend, do you seriously wish to range yourself on the side of a woman who has murdered?
Murder—the most repugnant of human crimes.’

 Bryan Martin sighed.

 ‘You don’t understand. JaneWilkinson is not an ordinary murderess. She—she has no sense of right or wrong.
Honestly she’s not responsible.’

 ‘That’ll be a question for the jury,’ said Japp.

 ‘Come, come,’ said Poirot kindly. ‘It is not as though you were accusing her. She is already accused.
You cannot refuse to tell us what you know. You have a duty to society, young man.’

 Bryan Martin sighed.

 ‘I suppose you’re right,’ he said. ‘What do you want me to tell you?’

 Poirot looked at Japp.

 ‘Have you ever heard Lady JaneWilkinson—or perhaps I’d better call her Miss JaneWilkinson Wilkinson—utter threats
against her husband?’ asked Japp.

 ‘Yes, several times.’

 ‘What did she say?’

 ‘She said that if he didn’t give her her freedom she’d have to “bump him off”.’

 ‘And that was not a joke, eh?’

 ‘No. I think she meant it seriously. Once she said she’d take a taxi and go round and kill him—youheard
that, M. Poirot?’

 He appealed pathetically to my friend.

 Poirot nodded.

 Japp went on with his questions.

 ‘Now, Mr Martin, we’ve been informed that she wanted her freedom in order to marry another man.
Do you know who that man was?’



 Bryan nodded.

 ‘Who?’

 ‘It was—the Duke of Merton.’

 ‘The Duke of Merton! Whew!’ The detective whistled. ‘Flying at high game, eh? Why, he’s said to be
one of the richest men in England.’

 Bryan nodded more dejectedly than ever.

 I could not quite understand Poirot’s attitude. He was lying back in his chair, his fingers pressed together
and the rhythmic motion of his head suggested the complete approval of a man who has put a chosen
record on the gramophone and is enjoying the result.

 ‘Wouldn’t her husband divorce her?’

 ‘No, he refused absolutely.’

 ‘You know that for a fact?’

 ‘Yes.’

 ‘And now,’ said Poirot, suddenly taking part once more in the proceedings, ‘you see where I come in,
my good Japp. I was asked by Lady JaneWilkinson to see her husband and try and get him to agree to a
divorce. I had an appointment for this morning.’

 Bryan Martin shook his head.

 ‘It would have been of no use,’ he declared confidently. ‘Edgware would never have agreed.’

 ‘You think not?’ said Poirot, turning an amiable glance on him.

 ‘Sure of it. JaneWilkinson knew that in her heart of hearts. She’d no real confidence that you’d succeed. She’d
given up hope. The man was a monomaniac on the subject of divorce.’

 Poirot smiled. His eyes grew suddenly very green.

 ‘You are wrong, my dear young man,’ he said gently. ‘I saw Lord Edgware yesterday,and he agreed to
a divorce .’

 There was no doubt that Bryan Martin was completely dumbfounded by this piece of news. He stared at
Poirot with his eyes almost starting out of his head.

 ‘You—you saw him yesterday?’ he spluttered.

 ‘At a quarter-past twelve,’ said Poirot in his methodical manner.

 ‘And he agreed to a divorce?’



 ‘He agreed to a divorce.’

 ‘You should have told JaneWilkinson at once,’ cried the young man reproachfully.

 ‘I did, M. Martin.’

 ‘You did?’ cried Martin and Japp together.

 Poirot smiled.

 ‘It impairs the motive a little, does it not?’ he murmured. ‘And now, M. Martin, let me call your attention
to this.’

 He showed him the newspaper paragraph.

 Bryan read it, but without much interest.

 ‘You mean this makes an alibi?’ he said. ‘I suppose Edgware was shot some time yesterday evening?’

 ‘He was stabbed, not shot,’ said Poirot.

 Martin laid the paper down slowly.

 ‘I’m afraid this does no good,’ he said regretfully. ‘JaneWilkinson didn’t go to that dinner.’

 ‘How do you know?’

 ‘I forget. Somebody told me.’

 ‘That is a pity,’ said Poirot thoughtfully.

 Japp looked at him curiously.

 ‘I can’t make you out, Moosior. Seems now as though you don’t want the young woman to be guilty.’

 ‘No, no, my good Japp. I am not the partisan you think. But frankly, the case as you present it, revolts
the intelligence.’

 ‘What do you mean, revolts the intelligence? It doesn’t revolt mine.’

 I could see words trembling on Poirot’s lips. He restrained them.

 ‘Here is a young woman who wishes, you say, to get rid of her husband. That point I do not dispute.
She told me so frankly.Eh bien , how does she set about it? She repeats several times in the loud clear
voice before witnesses that she is thinking of killing him. She then goes out one evening. Calls at his
house, has herself announced, stabs him and goes away. What do you call that, my good friend? Has it
even the common sense?’

 ‘It was a bit foolish, of course.’

 ‘Foolish? It is the imbecility!’



 ‘Well,’ said Japp, rising. ‘It’s all to the advantage of the police when criminals lose their heads. I must go
back to the Savoy now.’

 ‘You permit that I accompany you?’

 Japp made no demur and we set out. Bryan Martin took a reluctant leave of us. He seemed to be in a
great state of nervous excitement. He begged earnestly that any further development might be reported to
him.

 ‘Nervy sort of chap,’ was Japp’s comment on him.

 Poirot agreed.

 At the Savoy we found an extremely legal-looking gentleman who had just arrived, and we proceeded
all together to JaneWilkinson’s suite. Japp spoke to one of his men.

 ‘Anything?’ he inquired laconically.

 ‘She wanted to use the telephone!’

 ‘Who did she telephone to?’ inquired Japp eagerly.

 ‘Jay’s. For mourning.’

 Japp swore under his breath. We entered the suite.

 The widowed Lady JaneWilkinson was trying on hats in front of the glass. She was dressed in a filmy creation
of black and white. She greeted us with a dazzling smile.

 ‘Why, M. Poirot, how good of you to come along. Mr Moxon,’ (this was to the solicitor) ‘I’m so glad
you’ve come. Just sit right by me and tell what questions I ought to answer. This man here seems to think
that I went out and killed George this morning.’

 ‘Last night, madam,’ said Japp.

 ‘You said this morning. Ten o’clock.’

 ‘I said ten p.m.’

 ‘Well. I can never tell which is which—a.m.’s and p.m.’s.’

 ‘It’s only just about ten o’clock now,’ added the inspector severely.

 JaneWilkinson’s eyes opened very wide.

 ‘Mercy,’ she murmured. ‘It’s years since I’ve been awake as early as this. Why, it must have been Early
Dawn when you came along.’

 ‘One moment, Inspector,’ said Mr Moxon in his ponderous legal voice. ‘When am I to understand that
this—er—regrettable—most shocking—occurrence took place?’



 ‘Round about ten o’clock last night, sir.’

 ‘Why, that’s all right,’ said JaneWilkinson sharply. ‘I was at a party—Oh!’ She covered her mouth up suddenly.
‘Perhaps I oughtn’t to have said that.’

 Her eyes sought the solicitor’s in timid appeal.

 ‘If, at ten o’clock last night, you were—er—at a party, Lady JaneWilkinson, I—er—I can see no objection
to your informing the inspector of the fact—no objection whatever.’

 ‘That’s right,’ said Japp. ‘I only asked you for a statement of your movements yesterday evening.’

 ‘You didn’t. You said ten something m. And anyway you gave me the most terrible shock. I fainted
deadaway, Mr Moxon.’

 ‘About this party, Lady JaneWilkinson?’

 ‘It was at Sir Montagu Corner’s—at Chiswick.’

 ‘What time did you go there?’

 ‘The dinner was for eight-thirty.’

 ‘You left here—when?’

 ‘I started about eight o’clock. I dropped in at the Piccadilly Palace for a moment to say goodbye to an
American friend who was leaving for the States—Mrs Van Dusen. I got to Chiswick at a quarter to
nine.’

 ‘What time did you leave?’

 ‘About half-past eleven.’

 ‘You came straight back here?’

 ‘Yes.’

 ‘In a taxi?’

 ‘No. In my own car. I hire it from the Daimler people.’

 ‘And whilst you were at the dinner you didn’t leave it?’

 ‘Well—I—’

 ‘So you did leave it?’

 It was like a terrier pouncing on a rat.

 ‘I don’t know what you mean. I was called to the telephone when we were at dinner.’



 ‘Who called you?’

 ‘I guess it was some kind of hoax. A voice said, “Is that Lady JaneWilkinson?” And I said, “Yes, that’s right,”
and then they just laughed and rang off.’

 ‘Did you go outside the house to telephone?’

 JaneWilkinson’s eyes opened wide in amazement.

 ‘Of course not.’

 ‘How long were you away from the dinner table?’

 ‘About a minute and a half.’

 Japp collapsed after that. I was fully convinced that he did not believe a word she was saying, but having
heard her story he could do no more until he had confirmed or disproved it.

 Having thanked her coldly, he withdrew.

 We also took our leave but she called Poirot back.

 ‘M. Poirot. Will you do something for me?’

 ‘Certainly, Madame.’

 ‘Send a cable for me to the Duke in Paris. He’s at the Crillon. He ought to know about this. I don’t like
to send it myself. I guess I’ve got to look the bereaved widow for a week or two.’

 ‘It is quite unnecessary to cable, Madame,’ said Poirot gently. ‘It will be in the papers over there.’

 ‘Why, what a headpiece you’ve got! Of course it will. Much better not to cable. I feel it’s up to me to
keep up my position now everything’s gone right. I want to act the way a widow should. Sort of
dignified, you know. I thought of sending a wreath of orchids. They’re about the most expensive things
going. I suppose I shall have to go to the funeral. What do you think?’

 ‘You will have to go to the inquest first, Madame.’

 ‘Why, I suppose that’s true.’ She considered for a moment or two. ‘I don’t like that Scotland Yard
inspector at all. He just scared me to death. M. Poirot?’

 ‘Yes?’

 ‘Seems it’s kind of lucky I changed my mind and went to that party after all.’

 Poirot had been going towards the door. Suddenly, at these words, he wheeled round.

 ‘What is that you say, Madame? You changed your mind?’

 ‘Yes. I meant to give it a miss. I had a frightful headache yesterday afternoon.’



 Poirot swallowed once or twice. He seemed to have a difficulty in speaking.

 ‘Did you—say so to anyone?’ he asked at last.

 ‘Certainly I did. There was quite a crowd of us having tea and they wanted me to go on to a cocktail
party and I said “No.” I said my head was aching fit to split and that I was going right home and that I
was going to cut the dinner too.’

 ‘And what made you change your mind, Madame?’

 ‘Ellis went on at me. Said I couldn’t afford to turn it down. Old Sir Montagu pulls a lot of strings, you
know, and he’s a crotchety creature—takes offence easily. Well, I didn’t care. Once I marry Merton I’m
through with all this. But Ellis is always on the cautious side. She said there’s many a slip, etc., and after
all I guess she’s right. Anyway, off I went.’

 ‘You owe Ellis a debt of gratitude, Madame,’ said Poirot seriously.

 ‘I suppose I do. That inspector had got it all taped out, hadn’t he?’

 She laughed, Poirot did not. He said in a low voice:

 ‘All the same—this gives one furiously to think. Yes, furiously to think.’

 ‘Ellis,’ called JaneWilkinson.

 The maid came in from the next room.

 ‘M. Poirot says it’s very lucky you made me go to that party last night.’

 Ellis barely cast a glance at Poirot. She was looking grim and disapproving.

 ‘It doesn’t do to break engagements, m’lady. You’re much too fond of doing it. People don’t always
forgive it. They turn nasty.’

 JaneWilkinson picked up the hat she had been trying on when we came in. She tried it again.

 ‘I hate black,’ she said disconsolately. ‘I never wear it. But I suppose, as a correct widow I’ve just got
to. All those hats are too frightful. Ring up the other hat place, Ellis. I’ve got to be fit to be seen.’

 Poirot and I slipped quietly from the room.

 Chapter 7

 The Secretary

 We had not seen the last of Japp. He reappeared about an hour later, flung down his hat on the table
and said he was eternally blasted.

 ‘You have made the inquiries?’ asked Poirot sympathetically.



 Japp nodded gloomily.

 ‘And unless fourteen people are lying, she didn’t do it,’ he growled.

 He went on:

 ‘I don’t mind telling you, M. Poirot, that I expected to find a put-up job. On the face of it, it didn’t seem
likely that anyone else could have killed Lord Edgware. She’s the only person who’s got the ghost of a
motive.’

 ‘I would not say that.Mais continuez .’

 ‘Well, as I say, I expected to find a put-up job. You know what these theatrical crowds are—they’d all
hang together to screen a pal. But this is rather a different proposition. The people there last night were all
big guns, they were none of them close friends of hers and some of them didn’t know each other. Their
testimony is independent and reliable. I hoped then to find that she’d slipped away for half an hour or so.
She could easily have done that—powdering her nose or some such excuse. But no, she did leave the
dinner table as she told us to answer a telephone call, but the butler was with her—and, by the way, it
was just as she told us. He heard what she said. “Yes, quite right. This is Lady JaneWilkinson.” And then the
other side rang off. It’s curious, that, you know. Not that it’s got anything to do with it.’

 ‘Perhaps not—but it is interesting. Was it a man or a woman who rang up?’

 ‘A woman, I think she said.’

 ‘Curious,’ said Poirot thoughtfully.

 ‘Never mind that,’ said Japp impatiently. ‘Let’s get back to the important part. The whole evening went
exactly as she said. She got there at a quarter to nine, left at half-past eleven and got back here at a
quarter to twelve. I’ve seen the chauffeur who drove her—he’s one of Daimler’s regular people. And the
people at the Savoy saw her come in and confirm the time.’

 ‘Eh bien, that seems very conclusive.’

 ‘Then what about those two in Regent Gate? It isn’t only the butler. Lord Edgware’s secretary saw her
too. They both swear by all that’s holy that it was Lady JaneWilkinson who came here at ten o’clock.’

 ‘How long has the butler been there?’

 ‘Six months. Handsome chap, by the way.’

 ‘Yes, indeed.Eh bien , my friend, if he has only been there six months he cannot have recognized Lady
JaneWilkinson since he had not seen her before.’

 ‘Well, he knew her from her pictures in the papers. And anyway the secretary knew her. She’s been
with Lord Edgware five or six years, and she’s the only one who’s absolutely positive.’

 ‘Ah!’ said Poirot. ‘I should like to see the secretary.’

 ‘Well, why not come along with me now?’



 ‘Thank you,mon ami , I should be delighted to do so. You include Hastings in your invitation, I hope?’

 Japp grinned.

 ‘What do you think? Where the master goes, there the dog follows,’ he added in what I could not think
was the best of taste.

 ‘Reminds me of the Elizabeth Canning Case,’ said Japp. ‘You remember? How at least a score of
witnesses on either side swore they had seen the gipsy, Mary Squires, in two different parts of England.
Good reputable witnesses, too. And she with such a hideous face there couldn’t be two like it. That
mystery was never cleared up. It’s very much the same here. Here’s a separate lot of people prepared to
swear a woman was in two different places at the same time. Which of ’em is speaking the truth?’

 ‘That ought not to be difficult to find out.’

 ‘So you say—but this woman—Miss Carroll, reallyknew Lady JaneWilkinson. I mean she’d lived in the
house with her day after day. She wouldn’t be likely to make a mistake.’

 ‘We shall soon see.’

 ‘Who comes into the title?’ I asked.

 ‘A nephew, RonaldMarsh. Bit of a waster, I understand.’

 ‘What does the doctor say as to the time of death?’ asked Poirot.

 ‘We’ll have to wait for the autopsy to be exact, you know. See where the dinner had got to.’ Japp’s
way of putting things was, I am sorry to say, far from refined. ‘But ten o’clock fits in well enough. He
was last seen alive at a few minutes past nine when he left the dinner table and the butler took whisky and
soda into the library. At eleven o’clock when the butler went up to bed the light was out—so he must
have been dead then. He wouldn’t have been sitting in the dark.’

 Poirot nodded thoughtfully. A moment or two later we drew up at the house, the blinds of which were
now down.

 The door was opened to us by the handsome butler.

 Japp took the lead and went in first. Poirot and I followed. The door opened to the left, so that the
butler stood against the wall on that side. Poirot was on my right and, being smaller than I was, it was
only just as we stepped into the hall that the butler saw him. Being close to him, I heard the sudden intake
of his breath and looked sharply at the man to find him staring at Poirot with a kind of startled fear visible
on his face. I put the fact away in my mind for what it might be worth.

 Japp marched into the dining-room, which lay on our right, and called the butler in after him.

 ‘Now then, Alton, I want to go into this again very carefully. It was ten o’clock when this lady came?’

 ‘Her ladyship? Yes, sir.’

 ‘How did you recognize her?’ asked Poirot.



 ‘She told me her name, sir, and besides I’ve seen her portrait in the papers. I’ve seen her act, too.’

 Poirot nodded.

 ‘How was she dressed?’

 ‘In black, sir. Black walking dress, and a small black hat. A string of pearls and grey gloves.’

 Poirot looked a question at Japp.

 ‘White taffeta evening dress and ermine wrap,’ said the latter succinctly.

 The butler proceeded. His tale tallied exactly with that which Japp had already passed on to us.

 ‘Did anybody else come and see your master that evening?’ asked Poirot.

 ‘No, sir.’

 ‘How was the front door fastened?’

 ‘It has a Yale lock, sir. I usually draw the bolts when I go to bed, sir. At eleven, that is. But last night
Miss Geraldine was at the opera so it was left unbolted.’

 ‘How was it fastened this morning?’

 ‘It was bolted, sir. Miss Geraldine had bolted it when she came in.’

 ‘When did she come in? Do you know?’

 ‘I think it was about a quarter to twelve, sir.’

 ‘Then during the evening until a quarter to twelve, the door could not be opened from outside without a
key? From the inside it could be opened by simply drawing back the handle.’

 ‘Yes, sir.’

 ‘How many latchkeys were there?’

 ‘His lordship had his, sir, and there was another key in the hall drawer which Miss Geraldine took last
night. I don’t know if there were any others.’

 ‘Does nobody else in the house have a key?’

 ‘No, sir. Miss Carroll always rings.’

 Poirot intimated that that was all he wished to ask and we went in search of the secretary.

 We found her busily writing at a large desk.

 Miss Carroll was a pleasant efficient-looking woman of about forty-five. Her fair hair was turning grey
and she wore pince-nez through which a pair of shrewd blue eyes gleamed out on us. When she spoke I



recognized the clear businesslike voice that had spoken to me through the telephone.

 ‘Ah! M. Poirot,’ she said as she acknowledged Japp’s introduction. ‘Yes. It was with you I made that
appointment for yesterday morning.’

 ‘Precisely, Mademoiselle.’

 I thought that Poirot was favourably impressed by her. Certainly she was neatness and precision
personified.

 ‘Well, Inspector Japp?’ said Miss Carroll. ‘What more can I do for you?’

 ‘Just this. Are you absolutely certain that it was Lady JaneWilkinson who came here last night?’

 ‘That’s the third time you’ve asked me. Of course I’m sure. I saw her.’

 ‘Where did you see her, Mademoiselle?’

 ‘In the hall. She spoke to the butler for a minute then she went along the hall and in at the library door.’

 ‘And where were you?’

 ‘On the first floor—looking down.’

 ‘And you were positive you were not mistaken?’

 ‘Absolutely. I saw her face distinctly.’

 ‘You could not have been misled by a resemblance?’

 ‘Certainly not. JaneWilkinson Wilkinson’s features are quite unique. It was her.’

 Japp threw a glance at Poirot as much as to say: ‘You see.’

 ‘Had Lord Edgware any enemies?’ asked Poirot suddenly.

 ‘Nonsense,’ said Miss Carroll.

 ‘How do you mean—nonsense, Mademoiselle?’

 ‘Enemies! People in these days don’t haveenemies . Not English people!’

 ‘Yet Lord Edgware was murdered.’

 ‘That was his wife,’ said Miss Carroll.

 ‘A wife is not an enemy—no?’

 ‘I’m sure it was a most extraordinary thing to happen. I’ve never heard of such a thing happening—I
mean to anyone in our class of life.’



 It was clearly Miss Carroll’s idea that murders were only committed by drunken members of the lower
classes.

 ‘How many keys are there to the front door?’

 ‘Two,’ replied Miss Carroll promptly. ‘Lord Edgware always carried one. The other was kept in the
drawer in the hall, so that anybody who was going to be late in could take it. There was a third one, but
Captain Marsh lost it. Very careless.’

 ‘Did RonaldMarsh come much to the house?’

 ‘He used to live here until three years ago.’

 ‘Why did he leave?’ asked Japp.

 ‘I don’t know. He couldn’t get on with his uncle, I suppose.’

 ‘I think you know a little more than that, Mademoiselle,’ said Poirot gently.

 She darted a quick glance at him.

 ‘I am not one to gossip, M. Poirot.’

 ‘But you can tell us the truth concerning the rumours of a serious disagreement between Lord Edgware
and his nephew.’

 ‘It wasn’t so serious as all that. Lord Edgware was a difficult man to get on with.’

 ‘Even you found that?’

 ‘I’m not speaking of myself. I never had any disagreement with Lord Edgware. He always found me
perfectly reliable.’

 ‘But as regards RonaldMarsh ’

 Poirot stuck to it, gently continuing to goad her into further revelations.

 Miss Carroll shrugged her shoulders.

 ‘He was extravagant. Got into debt. There was some other trouble—I don’t know exactly what. They
quarrelled. Lord Edgware forbade him the house. That’s all.’

 Her mouth closed firmly. Evidently she intended to say no more.

 The room we had inteviewed her in was on the first floor. As we left it, Poirot took me by the arm.

 ‘A little minute. Remain here if you will, Hastings. I am going down with Japp. Watch till we have gone
into the library, then join us there.’

 I have long ago given up asking Poirot questions beginning ‘Why?’ Like the Light Brigade ‘Mine not to
reason why, mine but to do or die,’ though fortunately it has not yet come to dying! I thought that



possibly he suspected the butler of spying on him and wanted to know if such were really the case.

 I took up my stand looking over the banisters. Poirot and Japp went first to the front door—out of my
sight. Then they reappeared walking slowly along the hall. I followed their backs with my eye until they
had gone into the library. I waited a minute or two in case the butler appeared, but there was no sign of
anyone, so I ran down the stairs and joined them.

 The body had, of course, been removed. The curtains were drawn and the electric light was on. Poirot
and Japp were standing in the middle of the room looking round them.

 ‘Nothing here,’ Japp was saying.

 And Poirot replied with a smile:

 ‘Alas! not the cigarette ash—nor the footprint—nor a lady’s glove—nor even a lingering perfume!
Nothing that the detective of fiction so conveniently finds.’

 ‘The police are always made out to be as blind as bats in detective stories,’ said Japp with a grin.

 ‘I found a clue once,’ said Poirot dreamily. ‘But since it was four feet long instead of four centimetres no
one would believe in it.’

 I remembered the circumstance and laughed. Then I remembered my mission.

 ‘It’s all right, Poirot,’ I said. ‘I watched, but no one was spying upon you as far as I could see.’

 ‘The eyes of my friend Hastings,’ said Poirot in a kind of gentle mockery. ‘Tell me, my friend, did you
notice the rose between my lips?’

 ‘The rose between your lips?’ I asked in astonishment. Japp turned aside spluttering with laughter.

 ‘You’ll be the death of me, M. Poirot,’ he said. ‘The death of me. A rose. What next?’

 ‘I had the fancy to pretend I was Carmen,’ said Poirot quite undisturbed.

 I wondered if they were going mad or if I was.

 ‘You did not observe it, Hastings?’ There was reproach in Poirot’s voice.

 ‘No,’ I said, staring. ‘But then I couldn’t see your face.’

 ‘No matter.’ He shook his head gently.

 Were they making fun of me?

 ‘Well,’ said Japp. ‘No more to do here, I fancy. I’d like to see the daughter again if I could. She was
too upset before for me to get anything out of her.’

 He rang the bell for the butler.

 ‘Ask Miss Marsh if I can see her for a few moments?’



 The man departed. It was not he, however, but Miss Carroll who entered the room a few minutes later.

 ‘Geraldine is asleep,’ she said. ‘She’s had a terrible shock, poor child. After you left I gave her
something to make her sleep and she’s fast asleep now. In an hour or two, perhaps.’

 Japp agreed.

 ‘In any case there’s nothing she can tell you that I can’t,’ said Miss Carroll firmly.

 ‘What is your opinion of the butler?’ asked Poirot.

 ‘I don’t like him much and that’s a fact,’ replied Miss Carroll. ‘But I can’t tell you why.’

 We had reached the front door.

 ‘It was up there that you stood, was it not, last night, Mademoiselle?’ said Poirot suddenly, pointing with
his hands up the stairs.

 ‘Yes. Why?’

 ‘And you saw Lady JaneWilkinson go along the hall into the study?’

 ‘Yes.’

 ‘And you saw her face distinctly?’

 ‘Certainly.’

 ‘But you could not have seen her face, Mademoiselle. You can only have seen the back of her head
from where you were standing.’

 Miss Carroll flushed angrily. She seemed taken aback.

 ‘Back of her head, her voice, her walk! It’s all the same thing. Absolutely unmistakable! I tell you Iknow
it was JaneWilkinson Wilkinson—a thoroughly bad woman if there ever was one.’

 And turning away she flounced upstairs.

 Chapter 8

 Possibilities

 Japp had to leave us. Poirot and I turned into Regent’s Park and found a quiet seat.

 ‘I see the point of your rose between the lips now,’ I said, laughing. ‘At the moment I thought you had
gone mad.’

 He nodded without smiling.

 ‘You observe, Hastings, that the secretary is a dangerous witness, dangerous because inaccurate. You



notice that she stated positively that she saw the visitor’sface ? At the time I thought that impossible.
Comingfrom the study—yes, but not goingto the study. So I made my little experiment which resulted asI
thought, and then sprung my trap upon her. She immediately changed her ground.’

 ‘Her belief was quite unaltered, though,’ I argued. ‘And after all, a voice and a walk are just as
unmistakable.’

 ‘No, no.’

 ‘Why, Poirot, I think a voice and the general gait are about the most characteristic things about a
person.’

 ‘I agree. And therefore they are the most easily counterfeited.’

 ‘You think—’

 ‘Cast your mind back a few days. Do you remember one evening as we sat in the stalls of a theatre—’

 ‘Carlotta Adams? Ah! but then she is a genius.’

 ‘A well-known person is not so difficult to mimic. But I agree she has unusual gifts. I believe she could
carry a thing through without the aid of footlights and distance—’

 A sudden thought flashed into my mind.

 ‘Poirot,’ I cried. ‘You don’t think that possibly—no, that would be too much of a coincidence.’

 ‘It depends how you look at it, Hastings. Regarded from one angle it would be no coincidence at all.’

 ‘But why should Carlotta Adams wish to kill Lord Edgware? She did not even know him.’

 ‘How do you know she did not know him? Do not assume things, Hastings. There may have been some
link between them of which we know nothing. Not that that is precisely my theory.’

 ‘Then you have a theory?’

 ‘Yes. The possibility of Carlotta Adams being involved struck me from the beginning.’

 ‘But, Poirot—’

 ‘Wait, Hastings. Let me put together a few facts for you. Lady JaneWilkinson, with a complete lack of
reticence, discusses the relations between her and her husband, and even goes so far as to talk of killing
him. Not only you and I hear this. A waiter hears it, her maid probably has heard it many times, Bryan
Martin hears it, and I imagine Carlotta Adams herself hears it. And there are the people to whom these
people repeat it. Then, in that same evening, the excellence of Carlotta Adams’ imitation of JaneWilkinson is
commented upon. Who had a motive for killing Lord Edgware? His wife.

 ‘Now supposing that someone else wishes to do away with Lord Edgware. Here is a scapegoat ready
to his hand. On the day when JaneWilkinson Wilkinson announced that she had a headache and is going to have a
quiet evening—the plan is put into operation.



 ‘Lady JaneWilkinson must be seen to enter the house in Regent Gate. Well, she is seen. She even goes so far
as to announce her identity.Ah! c’est peu trop, ça! It would awaken suspicion in an oyster.

 ‘And another point—a small point, I admit. The woman who came to the house last night wore black.
JaneWilkinson Wilkinson never wears black . We heard her say so. Let us assume, then, that the woman who
came to the house last night wasnot JaneWilkinson Wilkinson—that it was a woman impersonating JaneWilkinson Wilkinson.
Did that woman kill Lord Edgware?

 ‘Did a third person enter that house and kill Lord Edgware? If so, did the person enter before or after
the supposed visit of Lady JaneWilkinson? If after, what did the woman say to Lord Edgware? How did she
explain her presence? She might deceive the butler who did not know her, and the secretary who did not
see her at close quarters. But she could not hope to deceive her husband. Or was there only a dead
body in the room? Was Lord Edgware killedbefore she entered the house—sometime between nine and
ten?’

 ‘Stop, Poirot!’ I cried. ‘You are making my head spin.’

 ‘No, no, my friend. We are only considering possibilities. It is like trying on the clothes. Does this fit!
No, it wrinkles on the shoulder? This one? Yes, that is better—but not quite large enough. This other one
is too small. So on and so on—until we reach the perfect fit—the truth.’

 ‘Who do you suspect of such a fiendish plot?’ I asked.

 ‘Ah! that is too early to say. One must go into the question of who has a motive for wishing Lord
Edgware dead. There is, of course, the nephew who inherits. A little obvious that, perhaps. And then in
spite of Miss Carroll’s dogmatic pronouncement, there is the question of enemies. Lord Edgware struck
me as a man who very easily might make enemies.’

 ‘Yes,’ I agreed. ‘That is so.’

 ‘Whoever it was must have fancied himself pretty safe. Remember, Hastings, but for her change of mind
at the last minute, JaneWilkinson Wilkinson would have had no alibi. She might have been in her room at the
Savoy, and it would have been difficult to prove it. She would have been arrested, tried—probably
hanged.’

 I shivered.

 ‘But there is one thing that puzzles me,’ went on Poirot. ‘The desire to incriminate her is clear—but what
then of the telephone call? Why did someone ring her up at Chiswick and, once satisfied of her presence
there, immediately ring off. It looks, does it not, as if someone wanted to be sure of her presence there
before proceeding to—what? That was at nine-thirty, almost certainly before the murder. The intention
then seems—there is no other word for it—beneficent. Itcannot be the murderer who rings up—the
murderer has laid all his plans to incriminate JaneWilkinson. Who, then, was it? It looks as though we have here
two entirely different sets of circumstances.’

 I shook my head, utterly fogged.

 ‘It might be just a coincidence,’ I suggested.

 ‘No, no, everything cannot be a coincidence. Six months ago, a letter was suppressed. Why? There are
too many things here unexplained. There must be some reason linking them together.’



 He sighed. Presently he went on:

 ‘That story that Bryan Martin came to tell us—’

 ‘Surely, Poirot, that has got no connection with this business.’

 ‘You are blind, Hastings, blind and wilfully obtuse. Do you not see that the whole thing makes a pattern?
A pattern confused at present but which will gradually become clear…’

 I felt Poirot was being over-optimistic. I did not feel that anything would ever become clear. My brain
was frankly reeling.

 ‘It’s no good,’ I said suddenly. ‘I can’t believe it of Carlotta Adams. She seemed such a—well, such a
thoroughly nice girl.’

 Yet, even as I spoke, I remembered Poirot’s words about love of money. Love of money—was that at
the root of the seemingly incomprehensible? I felt that Poirot had been inspired that night. He had seen
JaneWilkinson in danger—the result of the strange egotistical temperament. He had seen Carlotta led astray by
avarice.

 ‘I do not think she committed the murder, Hastings. She is too cool and level-headed for that. Possibly
she was not even told that murder would be done. She may have been used innocently. But then—’

 He broke off, frowning.

 ‘Even so, she’s an accessory after the fact now. I mean, she will see the news today. She will realize—’

 A hoarse sound broke from Poirot.

 ‘Quick, Hastings. Quick! I have been blind—imbecile. A taxi. At once.’

 I stared at him.

 He waved his arms.

 ‘A taxi—at once.’

 One was passing. He hailed it and we jumped in.

 ‘Do you know her address?’

 ‘Carlotta Adams, do you mean?’

 ‘Mais oui, mais oui. Quickly, Hastings, quickly. Every minute is of value. Do you not see?’

 ‘No,’ I said. ‘I don’t.’

 Poirot swore under his breath.

 ‘The telephone book? No, she would not be in it. The theatre.’



 At the theatre they were not disposed to give Carlotta’s address, but Poirot managed it. It was a flat in a
block of mansions near Sloane Square. We drove there, Poirot in a fever of impatience.

 ‘If I am not too late, Hastings. If I am not too late.’

 ‘What is all this haste? I don’t understand. What does it mean?’

 ‘It means that I have been slow. Terribly slow to realize the obvious. Ah!mon Dieu , if only we may be in
time.’

 Chapter 9

 The Second Death

 Though I did not understand the reason for Poirot’s agitation, I knew him well enough to be sure that he
had a reason for it.

 We arrived at Rosedew Mansions, Poirot sprang out, paid the driver and hurried into the building. Miss
Adams’ flat was on the first floor, as a visiting-card stuck on a board informed us.

 Poirot hurried up the stairs, not waiting to summon the lift which was at one of the upper floors.

 He knocked and rang. There was a short delay, then the door was opened by a neat middle-aged
woman with hair drawn tightly back from her face. Her eyelids were reddened as though with weeping.

 ‘Miss Adams?’ demanded Poirot eagerly.

 The woman looked at him.

 ‘Haven’t you heard?’

 ‘Heard? Heard what?’

 His face had gone deadly pale, and I realized that this, whatever it was, was what he had feared.

 The woman continued slowly to shake her head.

 ‘She’s dead. Passed away in her sleep. It’s terrible.’

 Poirot leaned against the doorpost.

 ‘Too late,’ he murmured.

 His agitation was so apparent that the woman looked at him with more attention.

 ‘Excuse me, sir, but are you a friend of hers? I do not remember seeing you come here before?’

 Poirot did not reply to this directly. Instead he said:

 ‘You have had a doctor? What did he say?’



 ‘Took an overdose of a sleeping draught. Oh! the pity of it! Such a nice young lady. Nasty dangerous
things—these drugs. Veronal he said it was.’

 Poirot suddenly stood upright. His manner took on a new authority.

 ‘I must come in,’ he said.

 The woman was clearly doubtful and suspicious.

 ‘I don’t think—’ she began.

 But Poirot meant to have his way. He took probably the only course that would have obtained the
desired result.

 ‘You must let me in,’ he said. ‘I am a detective and I have got to inquire into the circumstances of your
mistress’s death.’

 The woman gasped. She stood aside and we passed into the flat.

 From there on Poirot took command of the situation.

 ‘What I have told you,’ he said authoritatively, ‘is strictly confidential. It must not be repeated. Everyone
must continue to think that Miss Adams’ death was accidental. Please give me the name and address of
the doctor you summoned.’

 ‘Dr Heath, 17 Carlisle Street.’

 ‘And your own name?’

 ‘Bennett—Alice Bennett.’

 ‘You were attached to Miss Adams, I can see, Miss Bennett.’

 ‘Oh! yes, sir. She were a nice young lady. I worked for her last year when she were over here. It wasn’t
as though she were one of those actresses. She were a real young lady. Dainty ways she had and liked
everything just so.’

 Poirot listened with attention and sympathy. He had now no signs of impatience. I realized that to
proceed gently was the best way of extracting the information he wanted.

 ‘It must have been a great shock to you,’ he observed gently.

 ‘Oh! it was, sir. I took her in her tea—at half-past nine as usual and there she was lying—asleep I
thought. And I put the tray down. And I pulled the curtains—one of the rings caught, sir, and I had to
jerk it hard. Such a noise it made. I was surprised when I looked round to see she hadn’t woken. And
then all of a sudden something seemed to take hold of me. Something not quite natural about the way she
lay. And I went to the side of the bed, and I touched her hand. Icy cold it was, sir, and I cried out.’

 She stopped, tears coming into her eyes.



 ‘Yes, yes,’ said Poirot sympathetically. ‘It must have been terrible for you. Did Miss Adams often take
stuff to make her sleep?’

 ‘She’d take something for a headache now and again, sir. Some little tablets in a bottle, but it was some
other stuff she took last night, or so the doctor said.’

 ‘Did anyone come to see her last night? A visitor?’

 ‘No, sir. She was out yesterday evening, sir.’

 ‘Did she tell you where she was going?’

 ‘No, sir. She went out about seven o’clock.’

 ‘Ah! How was she dressed?’

 ‘She had on a black dress, sir. A black dress and a black hat.’

 Poirot looked at me.

 ‘Did she wear any jewellery?’

 ‘Just the string of pearls she always wore, sir.’

 ‘And gloves—grey gloves?’

 ‘Yes, sir. Her gloves were grey.’

 ‘Ah! Now describe to me, if you will, what her manner was. Was she gay? Excited? Sad? Nervous?’

 ‘It seemed to me she was pleased about something, sir. She kept smiling to herself, as though there were
some kind of joke on.’

 ‘What time did she return?’

 ‘A little after twelve o’clock, sir.’

 ‘And what was her manner then? The same?’

 ‘She was terribly tired, sir.’

 ‘But not upset? Or distressed?’

 ‘Oh! no, sir. I think she was pleased about something, but just done up, if you know what I mean. She
started to ring someone up on the telephone, and then she said she couldn’t bother. She’d do it
tomorrow morning.’

 ‘Ah!’ Poirot’s eyes gleamed with excitement. He leaned forward and spoke in a would-be indifferent
voice.

 ‘Did you hear the name of the person she rang up?’



 ‘No, sir. She just asked for the number and waited and then the exchange must have said: “I’m trying to
get them” as they do, sir, and she said: “All right,” and then suddenly she yawned and said: “Oh! I can’t
bother. I’m too tired,” and she put the receiver back and started undressing.’

 ‘And the number she called? Do you recollect that? Think. It may be important.’

 ‘I’m sorry I can’t say, sir. It was a Victoria number and that’s all I can remember. I wasn’t paying
special heed, you see.’

 ‘Did she have anything to eat or drink before she went to bed?’

 ‘A glass of hot milk, sir, like she always did.’

 ‘Who prepared it?’

 ‘I did, sir.’

 ‘And nobody came to the flat that evening?’

 ‘Nobody, sir.’

 ‘And earlier in the day?’

 ‘Nobody came that I can remember, sir. Miss Adams was out to lunch and tea. She came in at six
o’clock.’

 ‘When did the milk come? The milk she drank last night?’

 ‘It was the new milk she had, sir. The afternoon delivery. The boy leaves it outside the door at four
o’clock. But, oh! sir, I’m sure there wasn’t nothing wrong with the milk. I had it myself for tea this
morning. And the doctor he said positive as she’d taken the nasty stuff herself.’

 ‘It is possible that I am wrong,’ said Poirot. ‘Yes, it is possible that I am entirely wrong. I will see the
doctor. But you see, Miss Adams had enemies. Things are very different in America—’

 He hesitated, but the good Alice leapt at the bait.

 ‘Oh! I know, sir. I’ve read about Chicago and them gunmen and all that. It must be a wicked country
and what the police can be about, I can’t think. Not like our policemen.’

 Poirot left it thankfully at that, realizing that Alice Bennett’s insular proclivities would save him the trouble
of explanations.

 His eye fell on a small suitcase—more of an attaché case, that was lying on a chair.

 ‘Did Miss Adams take that with her when she went out last night?’

 ‘In the morning she took it, sir. She didn’t have it when she came back at tea-time, but she brought it
back last thing.’



 ‘Ah! You permit that I open it?’

 Alice Bennett would have permitted anything. Like most canny and suspicious women, once she had
overcome her distrust she was child’s play to manipulate. She would have assented to anything Poirot
suggested.

 The case was not locked, Poirot opened it. I came forward and looked over his shoulder.

 ‘You see, Hastings, you see?’ he murmured excitedly.

 The contents were certainly suggestive.

 There was a box of make-up materials, two objects which I recognized as elevators to place in shoes
and raise the height an inch or so, there was a pair of grey gloves and, folded in tissue paper, an
exquisitely-made wig of golden hair, the exact shade of gold of JaneWilkinson Wilkinson’s and dressed like hers
with a centre parting and curls in the back of the neck.

 ‘Do you doubt now, Hastings?’ asked Poirot.

 I believe I had up to that moment. But now I doubted no longer.

 Poirot closed the case again and turned to the maid.

 ‘You do not know with whom Miss Adams dined yesterday evening?’

 ‘No, sir.’

 ‘Do you know with whom she had lunch or tea?’

 ‘I know nothing about tea, sir. I believe she lunched with Miss Driver.’

 ‘Miss Driver?’

 ‘Yes, her great friend. She has a hat shop in Moffat Street, just off Bond Street. Genevieve it’s called.’

 Poirot noted the address in his notebook just below that of the doctor.

 ‘One thing more, Madame. Can you remember anything—anything at all—that Mademoiselle Adams
said or did after she came in at six o’clock that strikes you as at all unusual or significant?’

 The maid thought for a moment or two.

 ‘I really can’t say that I do, sir,’ she said at last. ‘I asked her if she would have tea and she said she’d
had some.’

 ‘Oh! she said she had had it,’ interrupted Poirot. ‘Pardon. Continue.’

 ‘And after that she was writing letters till just on the time she went out.’

 ‘Letters, eh? You do not know to whom?’



 ‘Yes, sir. It was just one letter—to her sister in Washington. She wrote to her sister twice a week
regular. She took the letter out with her to post because of catching the mail. But she forgot it.’

 ‘Then it is here still?’

 ‘No, sir. I posted it. She remembered last night just as she was getting into bed. And I said I’d run out
with it. By putting an extra stamp on it and putting it in the late fee box it would be all right.’

 ‘Ah!—and is that far?’

 ‘No, sir, the post office is just around the corner.’

 ‘Did you shut the door of the flat behind you?’

 Bennett stared.

 ‘No, sir. I just left it to—as I always do when I go out to post.’

 Poirot seemed about to speak—then checked himself.

 ‘Would you like to look at her, sir?’ asked the maid tearfully. ‘Looks beautiful she does.’

 We followed her into the bedroom.

 Carlotta Adams looked strangely peaceful and much younger than she had appeared that night at the
Savoy. She looked like a tired child asleep.

 There was a strange expression on Poirot’s face as he stood looking down on her. I saw him make the
sign of the Cross.

 ‘J’ai fait un serment, Hastings,’ he said as we went down the stairs.

 I did not ask him what his vow was. I could guess.

 A minute or two later he said:

 ‘There is one thing off my mind at least. I could not have saved her. By the time I heard of Lord
Edgware’s death she was already dead. That comforts me. Yes, that comforts me very much.’

 Chapter 10

 Jenny Driver

 Our next proceeding was to call upon the doctor whose address the maid had given us.

 He turned out to be a fussy elderly man somewhat vague in manner. He knew Poirot by repute and
expressed a lively pleasure at meeting him in the flesh.

 ‘And what can I do for you, M. Poirot?’ he asked after this opening preamble.

 ‘You were called this morning, M.le docteur , to the bedside of a Miss Carlotta Adams.’



 ‘Ah! yes, poor girl. Clever actress too. I’ve been twice to her show. A thousand pities it’s ended this
way. Why these girls must have drugs I can’t think.’

 ‘You think she was addicted to drugs, then?’

 ‘Well, professionally, I should hardly have said so. At all events she didn’t take them hypodermically.
No marks of the needle. Evidently always took it by the mouth. Maid said she slept well naturally, but
then maids never know. I don’t suppose she took veronal every night, but she’d evidently taken it for
some time.’

 ‘What makes you think so?’

 ‘This, dash it—where did I put the thing?’

 He was peering into a small case.

 ‘Ah! here it is.’

 He drew out a small black morocco handbag.

 ‘There’s got to be an inquest, of course. I brought this away so that the maid shouldn’t meddle with it.’

 Opening the pochette he took out a small gold box. On it were the initials C.A. in rubies. It was a
valuable and expensive trinket. The doctor opened it. It was nearly full of a white powder.

 ‘Veronal,’ he explained briefly. ‘Now look what’s written inside.’

 On the inside of the lid of the box was engraved:

 C.A. from D. Paris, Nov. 10th. Sweet Dreams.

 ‘November 10th,’ said Poirot thoughtfully.

 ‘Exactly, and we’re now in June. That seems to show that she’s been in the habit of taking the stuff for at
least six months, and as the year isn’t given, it might be eighteen months or two years and a half—or any
time.’

 ‘Paris. D,’ said Poirot, frowning.

 ‘Yes. Convey anything to you? By the way, I haven’t asked you what your interest is in the case. I’m
assuming you’ve got good grounds. I suppose you want to know if it’s suicide? Well, I can’t tell you.
Nobody can. According to the maid’s account she was perfectly cheerful yesterday. That looks like
accident, and in my opinion accident it is. Veronal’s very uncertain stuff. You can take a devil of a lot and
it won’t kill you, and you can take very little and off you go. It’s a dangerous drug for that reason.

 ‘I’ve no doubt they’ll bring it in Accidental Death at the inquest. I’m afraid I can’t be of any more help to
you.’

 ‘May I examine the little bag of Mademoiselle?’



 ‘Certainly. Certainly.’

 Poirot turned out the contents of the pochette. There was a fine handkerchief with C.M.A. in the corner,
a powder puff, a lipstick, a pound note and a little change, and a pair of pince-nez.

 These last Poirot examined with interest. They were gold-rimmed and rather severe and academic in
type.

 ‘Curious,’ said Poirot. ‘I did not know that Miss Adams wore glasses. But perhaps they are for
reading?’

 The doctor picked them up.

 ‘No, these are outdoor glasses,’ he affirmed. ‘Pretty powerful too. The person who wore these must
have been very short-sighted.’

 ‘You do not know if Miss Adams—’

 ‘I never attended her before. I was called in once to see a poisoned finger of the maid’s. Otherwise I
have never been in the flat. Miss Adams whom I saw for a moment on that occasion was certainly not
wearing glasses then.’

 Poirot thanked the doctor and we took our leave.

 Poirot wore a puzzled expression.

 ‘It can be that I am mistaken,’ he admitted.

 ‘About the impersonation?’

 ‘No, no. That seems to me proved. No, I mean as to her death. Obviously she had veronal in her
possession. It is possible that she was tired and strung up last night and determined to ensure herself a
good night’s rest.’

 Then he suddenly stopped dead—to the great surprise of the passers-by—and beat one hand
emphatically on the other.

 ‘No, no, no, no!’ he declared emphatically. ‘Why should that accident happen so conveniently? It was
no accident. It was not suicide. No, she played her part and in doing so she signed her death warrant.
Veronal may have been chosen simply because it was known that she occasionally took it and that she
had that box in her possession. But, if so, the murderer must have been someone who knew her well.
Who is D, Hastings? I would give a good deal to know who D was.’

 ‘Poirot,’ I said, as he remained rapt in thought. ‘Hadn’t we better go on? Everyone is staring at us.’

 ‘Eh? Well, perhaps you are right. Though it does not incommode me that people should stare. It does
not interfere in the least with my train of thought.’

 ‘People were beginning to laugh,’ I murmured.

 ‘That has no importance.’



 I did not quite agree. I have a horror of doing anything conspicuous. The only thing that affects Poirot is
the possibility of the damp or the heat affecting the set of his famous moustache.

 ‘We will take a taxi,’ said Poirot, waving his stick.

 One drew up by us, and Poirot directed it to go Genevieve in Moffat Street.

 Genevieve turned out to be one of those establishments where one nondescript hat and a scarf display
themselves in a glass box downstairs and where the real centre of operations is one floor up a flight of
musty-smelling stairs.

 Having climbed the stairs we came to a door with ‘Genevieve. Please Walk In’ on it, and having obeyed
this command we found ourselves in a small room full of hats while an imposing blonde creature came
forward with a suspicious glance at Poirot.

 ‘Miss Driver?’ asked Poirot.

 ‘I do not know if Modom can see you. What is your business, please?’

 ‘Please tell Miss Driver that a friend of Miss Adams would like to see her.’

 The blonde beauty had no need to go on this errand. A black velvet curtain was violently agitated and a
small vivacious creature with flaming red hair emerged.

 ‘What’s that?’ she demanded.

 ‘Are you Miss Driver?’

 ‘Yes. What’s that about Carlotta?’

 ‘You have heard the sad news?’

 ‘What sad news?’

 ‘Miss Adams died in her sleep last night. An overdose of veronal.’

 The girl’s eyes opened wide.

 ‘How awful!’ she exclaimed. ‘Poor Carlotta. I can hardly believe it. Why, she was full of life yesterday.’

 ‘Nevertheless it is true, Mademoiselle,’ said Poirot. ‘Now see—it is just on one o’clock. I want you to
do me the honour of coming out to lunch with me and my friend. I want to ask you several questions.’

 The girl looked him up and down. She was a pugilistic little creature. She reminded me in some ways of
a fox terrier.

 ‘Who are you?’ she demanded bluntly.

 ‘My name is Hercule Poirot. This is my friend Captain Hastings.’



 I bowed.

 Her glance travelled from one to the other of us.

 ‘I’ve heard of you,’ she said abruptly. ‘I’ll come.’

 She called to the blonde:

 ‘Dorothy?’

 ‘Yes, Jenny.’

 ‘Mrs Lester’s coming in about that Rose Descartes model we’re making for her. Try the different
feathers. Bye-bye, shan’t be long, I expect.’

 She picked up a small black hat, affixed it to one ear, powdered her nose furiously, and then looked at
Poirot.

 ‘Ready,’ she said abruptly.

 Five minutes afterwards we were sitting in a small restaurant in Dover Street. Poirot had given an order
to the waiter and cocktails were in front of us.

 ‘Now,’ said Jenny Driver. ‘I want to know the meaning of all this. What has Carlotta been getting herself
mixed up in?’

 ‘She had been getting herself mixed up in something, then, Mademoiselle?’

 ‘Now then, who is going to ask the questions, you or me?’

 ‘My idea was that I should,’ said Poirot, smiling. ‘I have been given to understand that you and Miss
Adams were great friends.’

 ‘Right.’

 ‘Eh bien, then I ask you, Mademoiselle, to accept my solemn assurance that what I do, I am doing in the
interests of your dead friend. I assure you that that is so.’

 There was a moment’s silence while Jenny Driver considered this question. Finally she gave a quick
assenting nod of the head.

 ‘I believe you. Carry on. What do you want to know?’

 ‘I understand, Mademoiselle, that your friend lunched with you yesterday.’

 ‘She did.’

 ‘Did she tell you what her plans were for last night?’

 ‘She didn’t exactly mention last night.’



 ‘But she said something?’

 ‘Well, she mentioned something that maybe is what you’re driving at. Mind you, she spoke in
confidence.’

 ‘That is understood.’

 ‘Well, let me see now. I think I’d better explain things in my own words.’

 ‘If you please, Mademoiselle.’

 ‘Well, then, Carlotta was excited. She isn’t often excited. She’s not that kind. She wouldn’t tell me
anything definite, said she’d promised not to, but she’d got something on. Something I gathered, in the
nature of a gigantic hoax.’

 ‘A hoax?’

 ‘That’s what she said. She didn’t say how or when or where. Only—’ She paused, frowning.
‘Well—you see—Carlotta’s not the kind of person who enjoys practical jokes or hoaxes or things of
that kind. She’s one of those serious, nice-minded, hard-working girls. What I mean is, somebody had
obviously put her up to this stunt. And I think—she didn’t say so, mind—’

 ‘No, no, I quite understand. What was it that you thought?’

 ‘I thought—I was sure—that in some way money was concerned. Nothing really ever excited Carlotta
except money. She was made that way. She’d got one of the best heads for business I’ve ever met. She
wouldn’t have been so excited and so pleased unless money—quite a lot of money—had been
concerned. My impression was that she’d taken on something for a bet—and that she was pretty sure of
winning. And yet that isn’t quite true. I mean, Carlotta didn’t bet. I’ve never known her make a bet. But
anyway, somehow or other, I’m sure money was concerned.’

 ‘She did not actually say so?’

 ‘N-no-o. Just said that she’d be able to do this, that and the other in the near future. She was going to
get her sister over from America to meet her in Paris. She was crazy about her little sister. Very delicate,
I believe, and musical. Well that’s all I know. Is that what you want?’

 Poirot nodded his head.

 ‘Yes. It confirms my theory. I had hoped, I admit, for more. I had anticipated that Miss Adams would
have been bound to secrecy. But I hoped that, being a woman, she would not have counted revealing the
secret to her best friend.’

 ‘I tried to make her tell me,’ admitted Jenny. ‘But she only laughed and said she’d tell me about it some
day.’

 Poirot was silent for a moment. Then he said:

 ‘You know the name of Lord Edgware?’

 ‘What? The man who was murdered? On a poster half an hour ago.’



 ‘Yes. Do you know if Miss Adams was acquainted with him?’

 ‘I don’t think so. I’m sure she wasn’t. Oh! wait a minute.’

 ‘Yes, Mademoiselle?’ said Poirot eagerly.

 ‘What was it now?’ She frowned, knitting her brow as she tried to remember. ‘Yes, I’ve got it now. She
mentioned him once. Very bitterly.’

 ‘Bitterly?’

 ‘Yes. She said—what was it?—that men like that shouldn’t be allowed to ruin other people’s lives by
their cruelty and lack of understanding. She said—why, so she did—that he was the kind of man whose
death would probably be a good thing for everybody.’

 ‘When was it she said this, Mademoiselle?’

 ‘Oh! about a month ago, I think it was.’

 ‘How did the subject come up?’

 Jenny Driver racked her brains for some minutes and finally shook her head.

 ‘I can’t remember,’ she confessed. ‘His name cropped up or something. It might have been in the
newspaper. Anyway, I remember thinking it odd that Carlotta should be so vehement all of a sudden
when she didn’t even know the man.’

 ‘Certainly it is odd,’ agreed Poirot thoughtfully. Then he asked:

 ‘Do you know if Miss Adams was in the habit of taking veronal?’

 ‘Not that I knew. I never saw her take it or mention taking it.’

 ‘Did you ever see in her bag a small gold box with the initials C.A. on it in rubies?’

 ‘A small gold box—no. I am sure I didn’t.’

 ‘Do you happen to know where Miss Adams was last November?’

 ‘Let me see. She went back to the States in November, I think—towards the end of the month. Before
that she was in Paris.’

 ‘Alone?’

 ‘Alone, of course! Sorry—perhaps you didn’t mean that! I don’t know why any mention of Paris always
suggests the worst. And it’s such a nice respectable place really. But Carlotta wasn’t the week-ending
sort, if that’s what you’re driving at.’

 ‘Now, Mademoiselle, I am going to ask you a very important question. Was there any man Miss Adams
was specially interested in?’



 ‘The answer to that is “No,”’ said Jenny slowly. ‘Carlotta, since I’ve known her, has been wrapped up
in her work and in her delicate sister. She’s had the “head of the family all depends on me” attitude very
strongly. So the answer’s NO—strictly speaking.’

 ‘Ah! and not speaking so strictly?’

 ‘I shouldn’t wonder if—lately—Carlotta hadn’t been getting interested in some man.’

 ‘Ah!’

 ‘Mind you, that’s entirely guesswork on my part. I’ve gone simply by her manner. She’s
been—different—not exactly dreamy, but abstracted. And she’s looked different, somehow. Oh! I can’t
explain. It’s the sort of thing that another woman just feels—and, of course, may be quite wrong about.’

 Poirot nodded.

 ‘Thank you, Mademoiselle. One thing more. Is there any friend of Miss Adams whose initial is D?’

 ‘D,’ said Jenny Driver thoughtfully. ‘D? No, I’m sorry. I can’t think of anyone.’

 Chapter 11

 The Egoist

 I do not think Poirot had expected any other answer to his question. All the same he shook his head
sadly. He remained lost in thought. Jenny Driver leant forward, her elbows on the table.

 ‘And now,’ she said, ‘am I going to be told anything?’

 ‘Mademoiselle,’ said Poirot. ‘First of all let me compliment you. Your answers to my questions have
been singularly intelligent. Clearly you have brains, Mademoiselle. You ask whether I am going to tell you
anything. I answer—not very much. I will tell you just a few bare facts, Mademoiselle.’

 He paused, and then said quietly:

 ‘Last night Lord Edgware was murdered in his library. At ten o’clock yesterday evening a lady whom I
believe to have been your friend Miss Adams came to the house, asked to see Lord Edgware, and
announced herself as Lady JaneWilkinson. She wore a golden wig and was made up to resemble the real Lady
JaneWilkinson who, as you probably know, is Miss JaneWilkinson Wilkinson, the actress. Miss Adams (if it were she)
only remained a few moments. She left the house at five minutes past ten but she did not return home till
after midnight. She went to bed, having taken an overdose of veronal. Now, Mademoiselle, you see the
point, perhaps, of some of the questions I have been asking you.’

 Jenny drew a deep breath.

 ‘Yes,’ she said, ‘I see now. I believe you’re right, M. Poirot. Right about its having been Carlotta, I
mean. For one thing, she bought a new hat off me yesterday.’

 ‘A new hat?’



 ‘Yes. She said she wanted one to shade the left side of her face.’

 There I must insert a few words of explanation as I do not know when these words will be read. I have
seen many fashions of hats in my time—the cloche that shaded the face so completely that one gave up in
despair the task of recognizing one’s friends. The tilted forward hat, the hat attached airily to the back of
the head, the beret, and many other styles. In this particular June the hat of the moment was shaped like
an inverted soup plate and was worn attached (as if by suction) over one ear, leaving the other side of the
face and hair open to inspection.

 ‘These hats are usually worn on the right side of the head?’ asked Poirot.

 The little modiste nodded.

 ‘But we keep a few to be worn on the opposite side,’ she explained. ‘Because there are people who
much prefer their right profile to the left or who have a habit of parting the hair on one side only. Now,
would there be any special reason for Carlotta’s wanting that side of her face to be in shadow?’

 I remembered that the door of the house in Regent Gate opened to the left, so that anyone entering
would be in full view of the butler that side. I remembered also that JaneWilkinson Wilkinson (so I had noticed the
other night) had a tiny mole at the corner of the left eye.

 I said as much excitedly. Poirot agreed, nodding his head vigorously.

 ‘It is so. It is so.Vous avez parfaitement raison , Hastings. Yes, that explains the purchase of the hat.’

 ‘M. Poirot?’ Jenny sat suddenly bolt upright. ‘You don’t think—you don’t for one moment think—that
Carlotta did it? Kill him, I mean. You can’t think that? Not just because she spoke so bitterly about him.’

 ‘I do not think so. But it is curious, all the same—that she should have spoken so, I mean. I would like
to know the reason for it. What had he done—what did she know of him to make her speak in such a
fashion?’

 ‘I don’t know—but she didn’t kill him. She’s—oh! she was—well—too refined.’

 Poirot nodded approvingly.

 ‘Yes, yes. You put that very well. It is a point psychological. I agree. This was a scientific crime—but
not a refined one.’

 ‘Scientific?’

 ‘The murderer knew exactly where to strike so as to reach the vital nerve centres at the base of the skull
where it joins the cord.’

 ‘Looks like a doctor,’ said Jenny thoughtfully.

 ‘Did Miss Adams know any doctors? I mean, was any particular doctor a friend of hers?’

 Jenny shook her head.

 ‘Never heard of one. Not over here, anyway.’



 ‘Another question. Did Miss Adams wear pince-nez?’

 ‘Glasses? Never.’

 ‘Ah!’ Poirot frowned.

 A vision rose in my mind. A doctor, smelling of carbolic, with short-sighted eyes magnified by powerful
lenses. Absurd!

 ‘By the way, did Miss Adams know Bryan Martin, the film actor?’

 ‘Why, yes. She used to know him as a child, she told me. I don’t think she saw much of him, though.
Just once in a while. She told me she thought he’d got very swollen-headed.’

 She looked at her watch and uttered an exclamation.

 ‘Goodness, I must fly. Have I helped you at all, M. Poirot?’

 ‘You have. I shall ask you for further help by and by.’

 ‘It’s yours. Someone staged this devilry. We’ve got to find out who it is.’

 She gave us a quick shake of the hand, flashed her white teeth in a sudden smile and left us with
characteristic abruptness.

 ‘An interesting personality,’ said Poirot as he paid the bill.

 ‘I like her,’ I said.

 ‘It is always a pleasure to meet a quick mind.’

 ‘A little hard, perhaps,’ I reflected. ‘The shock of her friend’s death did not upset her as much as I
should have thought it would have done.’

 ‘She is not the sort that weeps, certainly,’ agreed Poirot dryly.

 ‘Did you get what you hoped from the interview?’

 He shook his head.

 ‘No—I hoped—very much I hoped—to get a clue to the personality of D, the person who gave her the
little gold box. There I have failed. Unfortunately Carlotta Adams was a reserved girl. She was not one to
gossip about her friends or her possible love affairs. On the other hand, the person who suggested the
hoax may not have been a friend at all. It may have been a mere acquaintance who proposed
it—doubtless for some “sporting” reason—on a money basis. This person may have seen the gold box
she carried about with her and made some opportunity to discover what it contained.’

 ‘But how on earth did they get her to take it? And when?’

 ‘Well, there was the time during which the flat door was open—when the maid was out posting a letter.



Not that that satisfies me. It leaves too much to chance. But now—to work. We have still two possible
clues.’

 ‘Which are?’

 ‘The first is the telephone call to a Victoria number. It seems to me quite a probability that Carlotta
Adams would ring up on her return to announce her success. On the other hand, where was she between
five minutes past ten and midnight? She may have had an appointment with the instigator of the hoax. In
that case the telephone call may have been merely one to a friend.’

 ‘What is the second clue?’

 ‘Ah! that I do have hopes of. The letter, Hastings. The letter to her sister. It is possible—I only say
possible—that in that she may have described the whole business. She would not regard it as a breach of
faith, since the letter would not be read till a week later and in another country at that.’

 ‘Amazing, if that is so!’

 ‘We must not build too much upon it, Hastings. It is a chance, that is all. No, we must work now from
the other end.’

 ‘What do you call the other end?’

 ‘A careful study of those who profit in any degree by Lord Edgware’s death.’

 I shrugged my shoulders.

 ‘Apart from his nephew and his wife—’

 ‘And the man the wife wanted to marry,’ added Poirot.

 ‘The Duke? He is in Paris.’

 ‘Quite so. But you cannot deny that he is an interested party. Then there are the people in the
house—the butler—the servants. Who knows what grudges they may have had? But I think myself our
first point of attack should be a further interview with Mademoiselle JaneWilkinson Wilkinson. She is shrewd. She
may be able to suggest something.’

 Once more we made our way to the Savoy. We found the lady surrounded by boxes and tissue paper,
whilst exquisite black draperies were strewn over the back of every chair. JaneWilkinson had a rapt and serious
expression and was just trying on yet another small black hat before the glass.

 ‘Why, M. Poirot. Sit down. That is, if there’s anything to sit on. Ellis, clear something, will you?’

 ‘Madame. You look charming.’

 JaneWilkinson looked serious.

 ‘I don’t want exactly to play the hypocrite, M. Poirot. But one must observe appearances, don’t you
think? I mean, I think I ought to be careful. Oh! by the way, I’ve had the sweetest telegram from the
Duke.’



 ‘From Paris?’

 ‘Yes, from Paris. Guarded, of course, and supposed to be condolences, but put so that I can read
between the lines.’

 ‘My felicitations, Madame.’

 ‘M. Poirot.’ She clasped her hands, her husky voice dropped. She looked like an angel about to give
vent to thoughts of exquisite holiness. ‘I’ve been thinking. It all seems somiraculous , if you know what I
mean. Here I am—all my troubles over. No tiresome business of divorce. No bothers. Just my path
cleared and all plain sailing. It makes me feel almost religious—if you know what I mean.’

 I held my breath. Poirot looked at her, his head a little on one side. She was quite serious.

 ‘That is how it strikes you, Madame, eh?’

 ‘Things happen right for me,’ said JaneWilkinson in a sort of awed whisper. ‘I’ve thought and I’ve thought
lately—if Edgware was to die. And there—he’s dead! It’s—it’s almost like an answer to prayer.’

 Poirot cleared his throat.

 ‘I cannot say I look at it quite like that, Madame. Somebody killed your husband.’

 She nodded.

 ‘Why, of course.’

 ‘Has it not occurred to you to wonder who that someone was?’

 She stared at him. ‘Does it matter? I mean—what’s that to do with it? The Duke and I can be married in
about four or five months…’

 With difficulty Poirot controlled himself.

 ‘Yes, Madame, I know that. But apart from that has it not occurred to you to ask yourselfwho killed
your husband ?’

 ‘No.’ She seemed quite surprised by the idea. We could see her thinking about it.

 ‘Does it not interest you to know?’ asked Poirot.

 ‘Not very much, I’m afraid,’ she admitted. ‘I suppose the police will find out. They’re very clever, aren’t
they?’

 ‘So it is said. I, too, am going to make it my business to find out.’

 ‘Are you? How funny.’

 ‘Why funny?’



 ‘Well, I don’t know.’ Her eyes strayed back to the clothes. She slipped on a satin coat and studied
herself in the glass.

 ‘You do not object, eh?’ said Poirot, his eyes twinkling.

 ‘Why, of course not, M. Poirot. I should just love you to be clever about it all. I wish you every
success.’

 ‘Madame—I want your more than wishes. I want your opinion.’

 ‘Opinion?’ said JaneWilkinson absently, as she twisted her head over her shoulder. ‘What on?’

 ‘Who do you think likely to have killed Lord Edgware?’

 JaneWilkinson shook her head. ‘I haven’t any idea!’

 She wriggled her shoulders experimentally and took up the hand-glass.

 ‘Madame!’ said Poirot in a loud, emphatic voice. ‘Who DOyou THINK KILLED YOUR
HUSBAND?’

 This time it got through. JaneWilkinson threw him a startled glance. ‘Geraldine, I expect,’ she said.

 ‘Who is Geraldine?’

 But JaneWilkinson’s attention was gone again.

 ‘Ellis, take this up a little on the right shoulder. So. What, M. Poirot? Geraldine’s his daughter. No Ellis,
theright shoulder. That’s better. Oh! must you go, M. Poirot? I’m terribly grateful for everything. I mean,
for the divorce, even though it isn’t necessary after all. I shall always think you were wonderful.’

 I only saw JaneWilkinson Wilkinson twice again. Once on the stage, once when I sat opposite her at a luncheon
party. I always think of her as I saw her then, absorbed heart and soul in clothes, her lips carelessly
throwing out the words that were to influence Poirot’s further actions, her mind concentrated firmly and
beautifully on herself.

 ‘Epatant,’ said Poirot with reverence as we emerged into the Strand.

 Chapter 12

 The Daughter

 There was a letter sent by hand lying on the table when we got back to our rooms. Poirot picked it up,
slit it open with his usual neatness, and then laughed.

 ‘What is it you say—“Talk of the devil”? See here, Hastings.’

 I took the note from him.

 The paper was stamped 17 Regent Gate and was written in very upright characteristic handwriting which
looked easy to read and, curiously enough, was not.



 ‘Dear Sir(it ran),

 I hear you were at the house this morning with the inspector. I am sorry not to have had the opportunity
of speaking to you. If convenient to yourself I should be much obliged if you could spare me a few
minutes any time this afternoon.

 Yours truly,

 Geraldine Marsh.’

 ‘Curious,’ I said. ‘I wonder why she wants to see you?’

 ‘Is it curious that she should want to see me? You are not polite, my friend.’

 Poirot has the most irritating habit of joking at the wrong moment.

 ‘We will go round at once, my friend,’ he said, and lovingly brushing an imagined speck of dust from his
hat, he put it on his head.

 JaneWilkinson Wilkinson’s careless suggestion that Geraldine might have killed her father seemed to me
particularly absurd. Only a particularly brainless person could have suggested it. I said as much to Poirot.

 ‘Brains. Brains. What do we really mean by the term? In your idiom you would say that JaneWilkinson Wilkinson
has the brains of a rabbit. That is a term of disparagement. But consider the rabbit for a moment. He
exists and multiplies, does he not? That, in Nature, is a sign of mental superiority. The lovely Lady
JaneWilkinson she does not know history, or geography, nor the classicssans doute . The name of Lao Tse
would suggest to her a prize Pekingese dog, the name of Molière amaison de couture . But when it
comes to choosing clothes, to making rich and advantageous marriages, and to getting her own way—her
success is phenomenal. The opinion of a philosopher as to who murdered Lord Edgware would be no
good to me—the motive for murder from a philosopher’s point of view would be the greatest good of the
greatest number, and as that is difficult to decide, few philosophers are murderers. But a careless opinion
from Lady JaneWilkinson might be useful to me because her point of view would be materialistic and based on
a knowledge of the worst side of human nature.’

 ‘Perhaps there’s something in that,’ I conceded.

 ‘Nous voici,’ said Poirot. ‘I am curious to know why the young lady wishes so urgently to see me.’

 ‘It is a natural desire,’ I said, getting my own back. ‘You said so a quarter of an hour ago. The natural
desire to see something unique at close quarters.’

 ‘Perhaps it is you, my friend, who make an impression on her heart the other day,’ replied Poirot as he
rang the bell.

 I recalled the startled face of the girl who had stood in the doorway. I could still see those burning dark
eyes in the white face. That momentary glimpse had made a great impression on me.

 We were shown upstairs to a big drawing-room and in a minute or two Geraldine Marsh came to us
there.



 The impression of intensity which I had noticed before was heightened on this occasion. This tall, thin,
white-faced girl with her big haunting black eyes was a striking figure.

 She was extremely composed—in view of her youth, remarkably so.

 ‘It is very good of you to come so promptly, M. Poirot,’ she said. ‘I am sorry to have missed you this
morning.’

 ‘You were lying down?’

 ‘Yes. Miss Carroll—my father’s secretary, you know—insisted. She has been very kind.’

 There was a queer grudging note in the girl’s voice that puzzled me.

 ‘In what way can I be of service to you, Mademoiselle?’ asked Poirot.

 She hesitated a minute and then said:

 ‘On the day before my father was killed you came to see him?’

 ‘Yes, Mademoiselle.’

 ‘Why? Did he—send for you?’

 Poirot did not reply for a moment. He seemed to be deliberating. I believe, now, that it was a cleverly
calculated move on his part. He wanted to goad her into further speech. She was, he realized, of the
impatient type. She wanted things in a hurry.

 ‘Was he afraid of something? Tell me. Tell me. I must know. Who was he afraid of? Why? What did he
say to you? Oh! why can’t you speak?’

 I had thought that that forced composure was not natural. It had soon broken down. She was leaning
forward now, her hands twisting themselves nervously on her lap.

 ‘What passed between Lord Edgware and myself was in confidence,’ said Poirot slowly.

 His eyes never left her face.

 ‘Then it was about—I mean, it must have been something to do with—the family. Oh! you sit there and
torture me. Why won’t you tell me? It’s necessary for me to know. It’s necessary. I tell you.’

 Again, very slowly, Poirot shook his head, apparently a prey to deep perplexity.

 ‘M. Poirot.’ She drew herself up. ‘I’m his daughter. It is my right to know—what my father dreaded on
the last day but one of his life. It isn’t fair to leave me in the dark. It isn’t fair to him—not to tell me.’

 ‘Were you so devoted to your father, then, Mademoiselle?’ asked Poirot gently.

 She drew back as though stung.

 ‘Fond of him?’ she whispered. ‘Fond of him. I—I—’



 And suddenly her self-control snapped. Peals of laughter broke from her. She lay back in her chair and
laughed and laughed.

 ‘It’s so funny,’ she gasped. ‘It’s so funny—to be asked that.’

 That hysterical laughter had not passed unheard. The door opened and Miss Carroll came in. She was
firm and efficient.

 ‘Now, now, Geraldine, my dear, that won’t do. No, no. Hush, now. I insist. No. Stop it. I mean it. Stop
it at once.’

 Her determined manner had its effect. Geraldine’s laughter grew fainter. She wiped her eyes and sat up.

 ‘I’m sorry,’ she said in a low voice. ‘I’ve never done that before.’

 Miss Carroll was still looking at her anxiously.

 ‘I’m all right now, Miss Carroll. It was idiotic.’

 She smiled suddenly. A queer bitter smile that twisted her lips. She sat up very straight in her chair and
looked at no one.

 ‘He asked me,’ she said in a cold clear voice, ‘if I had been very fond of my father.’

 Miss Carroll made a sort of indeterminate cluck. It denoted irresolution on her part. Geraldine went on,
her voice high and scornful.

 ‘I wonder if it is better to tell lies or the truth? The truth, I think. I wasn’t fond of my father. I hated him!’

 ‘Geraldine dear.’

 ‘Why pretend? You didn’t hate him because he couldn’t touch you! You were one of the few people in
the world that he couldn’t get at. You saw him as the employer who paid you so much a year. His rages
and his queerness didn’t interest you—you ignored them. I know what you’d say, “Everyone has got to
put up with something.” You were cheerful and uninterested. You’re a very strong woman. You’re not
really human. But then you could have walked out of the house any minute. I couldn’t. I belonged.’

 ‘Really, Geraldine, I don’t think it’s necessary going into all this. Fathers and daughters often don’t get
on. But the less said in life the better, I’ve found.’

 Geraldine turned her back on her. She addressed herself to Poirot.

 ‘M. Poirot, Ihated my father! I am glad he is dead! It means freedom for me—freedom and
independence. I am not in the least anxious to find his murderer. For all we know the person who killed
him may have had reasons—ample reasons—justifying that action.’

 Poirot looked at her thoughtfully.

 ‘That is a dangerous principle to adopt, Mademoiselle.’



 ‘Will hanging someone else bring father back to life?’

 ‘No,’ said Poirot dryly. ‘But it may save other innocent people from being murdered.’

 ‘I don’t understand.’

 ‘A person who has once killed, Mademoiselle, nearly always kills again—sometimes again and again.’

 ‘I don’t believe it. Not—not a real person.’

 ‘You mean—not a homicidal maniac? But yes, it is true. One life is removed—perhaps after a terrific
struggle with the murderer’s conscience. Then—danger threatens—the second murder is morally easier.
At the slightest threatening of suspicion a third follows. And little by little an artistic pride arises—it is a
métier —to kill. It is done at last almost for pleasure.’

 The girl had hidden her face in her hands.

 ‘Horrible. Horrible. It isn’t true.’

 ‘And supposing I told you that ithad already happened ? That already—to save himself—the murderer
has killed a second time?’

 ‘What’s that, M. Poirot?’ cried Miss Carroll. ‘Another murder? Where? Who?’

 Poirot gently shook his head.

 ‘It was an illustration only. I ask pardon.’

 ‘Oh! I see. For a moment I really thought—Now, Geraldine, if you’ve finished talking arrant nonsense.’

 ‘You are on my side, I see,’ said Poirot with a little bow.

 ‘I don’t believe in capital punishment,’ said Miss Carroll briskly. ‘Otherwise I am certainly on your side.
Society must be protected.’

 Geraldine got up. She smoothed back her hair.

 ‘I am sorry,’ she said. ‘I am afraid I have been making rather a fool of myself. You still refuse to tell me
why my father called you in?’

 ‘Called him?’ said Miss Carroll in lively astonishment.

 ‘You misunderstand, Miss Marsh. I have not refused to tell you.’

 Poirot was forced to come out into the open.

 ‘I was only considering how far that interview might have been said to be confidential. Your father did
not call me in. I sought an interview withhim on behalf of a client. That client was Lady JaneWilkinson.’

 ‘Oh! I see.’



 An extraordinary expression came over the girl’s face. I thought at first it was disappointment. Then I
saw it was relief.

 ‘I have been very foolish,’ she said slowly. ‘I thought my father had perhaps thought himself menaced by
some danger. It was stupid.’

 ‘You know, M. Poirot, you gave me quite a turn just now,’ said Miss Carroll, ‘when you suggested that
woman had done a second murder.’

 Poirot did not answer her. He spoke to the girl.

 ‘Do you believe Lady JaneWilkinson committed the murder, Mademoiselle?’

 She shook her head.

 ‘No, I don’t. I can’t see her doing a thing like that. She’s much too—well, artificial.’

 ‘I don’t see who else can have done it,’ said Miss Carroll. ‘And I don’t think women of that kind have
got any moral sense.’

 ‘It needn’t have been her,’ argued Geraldine. ‘She may have come here and just had an interview with
him and gone away, and the real murderer may have been some lunatic who got in afterwards.’

 ‘All murderers are mentally deficient—of that I am assured,’ said Miss Carroll. ‘Internal gland
secretion.’

 At that moment the door opened and a man came in—then stopped awkwardly.

 ‘Sorry,’ he said. ‘I didn’t know anyone was in here.’

 Geraldine made a mechanical introduction.

 ‘My cousin, Lord Edgware. M. Poirot. It’s all right, RonaldMarsh. You’re not interrupting.’

 ‘Sure, Dina? How do you do, M. Poirot? Are your grey cells functioning over our particular family
mystery?’

 I cast my mind back trying to remember. That round, pleasant, vacuous face, the eyes with slight
pouches underneath them, the little moustache marooned like an island in the middle of the expanse of
face.

 Of course! It was Carlotta Adams’ escort on the night of the supper party in JaneWilkinson Wilkinson’s suite.

 RonaldMarsh . Now Lord Edgware.

 Chapter 13

 The Nephew

 The new Lord Edgware’s eye was a quick one. He noticed the slight start I gave.



 ‘Ah! you’ve got it,’ he said amiably. ‘Aunt JaneWilkinson’s little supper party. Just a shade bottled, wasn’t I? But
I fancied it passed quite unperceived.’

 Poirot was saying goodbye to Geraldine Marsh and Miss Carroll.

 ‘I’ll come down with you,’ said RonaldMarsh genially.

 He led the way down the stairs, talking as he went.

 ‘Rum thing—life. Kicked out one day, lord of the manor the next. My late unlamented uncle kicked me
out, you know, three years ago. But I expect you know all about that, M. Poirot?’

 ‘I had heard the fact mentioned—yes,’ replied Poirot composedly.

 ‘Naturally. A thing of that kind is sure to be dug up. The earnest sleuth can’t afford to miss it.’

 He grinned.

 Then he threw open the dining-room door.

 ‘Have a spot before you go.’

 Poirot refused. So did I. But the young man mixed himself a drink and continued to talk.

 ‘Here’s to murder,’ he said cheerfully. ‘In the space of one short night I am converted from the
creditor’s despair to the tradesman’s hope. Yesterday ruin stared me in the face, today all is affluence.
God bless Aunt JaneWilkinson.’

 He drained his glass. Then, with a slight change of manner, he spoke to Poirot.

 ‘Seriously, though, M. Poirot, whatare you doing here? Four days ago Aunt JaneWilkinson was dramatically
declaiming, “Who will rid me of this insolent tyrant?” and lo and behold she is ridded! Not by your
agency, I hope? The perfect crime, by Hercule Poirot, ex-sleuth hound.’

 Poirot smiled.

 ‘I am here this afternoon in answer to a note from Miss Geraldine Marsh.’

 ‘A discreet answer, eh? No, M. Poirot, what are you really doing here? For some reason or other you
are interesting yourself in my uncle’s death.’

 ‘I am always interested in murder, Lord Edgware.’

 ‘But you don’t commit it. Very cautious. You should teach Aunt JaneWilkinson caution. Caution and a shade
more camouflage. You’ll excuse me calling her Aunt JaneWilkinson. It amuses me. Did you see her blank face
when I did it the other night? Hadn’t the foggiest notion who I was.’

 ‘En verité?’

 ‘No. I was kicked out of here three months before she came along.’



 The fatuous expression of good nature on his face failed for a moment. Then he went on lightly:

 ‘Beautiful woman. But no subtlety. Methods are rather crude, eh?’

 Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

 ‘It is possible.’

 RonaldMarsh looked at him curiously.

 ‘I believe you think she didn’t do it. So she’s got round you too, has she?’

 ‘I have a great admiration for beauty,’ said Poirot evenly. ‘But also for—evidence.’

 He brought the last word out very quietly.

 ‘Evidence?’ said the other sharply.

 ‘Perhaps you do not know, Lord Edgware, that Lady JaneWilkinson was at a party at Chiswick last night at
the time she was supposed to have been seen here.’

 RonaldMarsh swore.

 ‘So she went after all! How like a woman! At six o’clock she was throwing her weight about, declaring
that nothing on earth would make her go, and I suppose about ten minutes after she’d changed her mind!
When planning a murder never depend upon a woman doing what she says she’ll do. That’s how the
best-laid plans of murder gang agley. No, M. Poirot, I’m not incriminating myself. Oh, yes, don’t think I
can’t read what’s passing through your mind. Who is the Natural Suspect? The well-known Wicked
Ne’er-do-Weel Nephew.’

 He leaned back in his chair chuckling.

 ‘I’m saving your little grey cells for you, M. Poirot. No need for you to hunt round for someone who
saw me in the offing when Aunt JaneWilkinson was declaring she never, never, never would go out that night, etc. I
was there. So you ask yourself did the wicked nephew in very truth come here last night disguised in a
fair wig and a Paris hat?’

 Seemingly enjoying the situation, he surveyed us both. Poirot, his head a little on one side, was regarding
him with close attention. I felt rather uncomfortable.

 ‘I had a motive—oh! yes, motive admitted. And I’m going to give you a present of a very valuable and
significant piece of information. I called to see my uncle yesterday morning. Why? To ask for money.
Yes, lick your lips over that. To ASK FOR MONEY. And I went away without getting any. And that
same evening—that very same evening—Lord Edgware dies. Good title that, by the way. Lord Edgware
Dies. Look well on a bookstall.’

 He paused. Still Poirot said nothing.

 ‘I’m really flattered by your attention, M. Poirot. Captain Hastings looks as though he had seen a
ghost—or were going to see one any minute. Don’t get so strung up, my dear fellow. Wait for the
anti-climax. Well, where were we? Oh! yes, case against the Wicked Nephew. Guilt is to be thrown on



the hated Aunt by Marriage. Nephew, celebrated at one time for acting female parts, does his supreme
histrionic effort. In a girlish voice he announces himself as Lady JaneWilkinson and sidles past the butler with
mincing steps. No suspicions are aroused. “JaneWilkinson,” cries my fond uncle. “George,” I squeak. I fling my
arms about his neck and neatly insert the penknife. The next details are purely medical and can be
omitted. Exit the spurious lady. And so to bed at the end of a good day’s work.’

 He laughed, and rising, poured himself out another whisky and soda. He returned slowly to his chair.

 ‘Works out well, doesn’t it? But you see, here comes the crux of the matter. The disappointment! The
annoying sensation of having been led up the garden. For now, M. Poirot, we come to the alibi!’

 He finished off his glass.

 ‘I always find alibis very enjoyable,’ he remarked. ‘Whenever I happen to be reading a detective story I
sit up and take notice when the alibi comes along. This is a remarkably good alibi. Three strong, and
Jewish at that. In plainer language, Mr, Mrs and Miss Dortheimer. Extremely rich and extremely musical.
They have a box in Covent Garden. Into that box they invite young men with prospects. I, M. Poirot, am
a young man with prospects—as good a one, shall we say, as they can hope to get. Do I like the opera?
Frankly, no. But I enjoy the excellent dinner in Grosvenor Square first, and I also enjoy an excellent
supper somewhere else afterwards, even if I do have to dance with Rachel Dortheimer and have a stiff
arm for two days afterwards. So you see, M. Poirot, there you are. When uncle’s lifeblood is flowing, I
am whispering cheerful nothings into the diamond encrusted ears of the fair (I beg her pardon, dark)
Rachel in a box at Covent Garden. Her long Jewish nose is quivering with emotion. And so you see, M.
Poirot, why I can afford to be so frank.’

 He leaned back in his chair.

 ‘I hope I have not bored you. Any question to ask?’

 ‘I can assure you that I have not been bored,’ said Poirot. ‘Since you are so kind, there is one little
question that I would like to ask.’

 ‘Delighted.’

 ‘How long, Lord Edgware, have you known Miss Carlotta Adams?’

 Whatever the young man had expected, it certainly had not been this. He sat up sharply with an entirely
new expression on his face.

 ‘Why on earth do you want to know that? What’s that got to do with what we’ve been talking about?’

 ‘I was curious, that was all. For the other, you have explained so fully everything there is to explain that
there is no need for me to ask questions.’

 RonaldMarsh shot a quick glance at him. It was almost as though he did not care for Poirot’s amiable
acquiescence. He would, I thought, have preferred him to be more suspicious.

 ‘Carlotta Adams? Let me see. About a year. A little more. I got to know her last year when she gave
her first show.’

 ‘You knew her well?’



 ‘Pretty well. She’s not the sort of girl you ever got to know frightfully well. Reserved and all that.’

 ‘But you liked her?’

 RonaldMarsh stared at him.

 ‘I wish I knew why you were so interested in the lady. Was it because I was with her the other night?
Yes, I like her very much. She’s sympathetic—listens to a chap and makes him feel he’s something of a
fellow after all.’

 Poirot nodded.

 ‘I comprehend. Then you will be sorry.’

 ‘Sorry? What about?’

 ‘That she is dead!’

 ‘What?’ RonaldMarsh sprang up in astonishment. ‘Carlotta dead?’

 He looked absolutely dumbfounded by the news.

 ‘You’re pulling my leg, M. Poirot. Carlotta was perfectly well the last time I saw her.’

 ‘When was that?’ asked Poirot quickly.

 ‘Day before yesterday, I think. I can’t remember.’

 ‘Tout de même, she is dead.’

 ‘It must have been frightfully sudden. What was it? A street accident?’

 Poirot looked at the ceiling.

 ‘No. She took an overdose of veronal.’

 ‘Oh! I say. Poor kid. How frightfully sad.’

 ‘N’est ce pas?’

 ‘Iam sorry. And she was getting on so well. She was going to get her kid sister over and had all sorts of
plans. Dash it. I’m more sorry than I can say.’

 ‘Yes,’ said Poirot. ‘It is sad to die when you are young—when you do not want to die—when all life is
open before you and you have everything to live for.’

 RonaldMarsh looked at him curiously.

 ‘I don’t think I quite get you, M. Poirot.’



 ‘No?’

 Poirot rose and held out his hand.

 ‘I express my thoughts—a little strongly, perhaps. For I do not like to see youth deprived of its right to
live, Lord Edgware. I feel—very strongly about it. I wish you good-day.’

 ‘Oh—er—good-bye.’

 He looked rather taken aback.

 As I opened the door I almost collided with Miss Carroll.

 ‘Ah! M. Poirot, they told me you hadn’t gone yet. I’d like a word with you if I may. Perhaps you
wouldn’t mind coming up to my room?

 ‘It’s about that child, Geraldine,’ she said when we had entered her sanctum and she had closed the
door.

 ‘Yes, Mademoiselle?’

 ‘She talked a lot of nonsense this afternoon. Now don’t protest. Nonsense! That’s what I call it and
that’s what it was. She broods.’

 ‘I could see that she was suffering from over-strain,’ said Poirot gently.

 ‘Well—to tell the truth—she hasn’t had a very happy life. No, one can’t pretend she has. Frankly, M.
Poirot, Lord Edgware was a peculiar man—not the sort of man who ought to have had anything to do
with the upbringing of children. Quite frankly, he terrorized Geraldine.’

 Poirot nodded.

 ‘Yes, I should imagine something of the kind.’

 ‘He was a peculiar man. He—I don’t quite know how to put it—but he enjoyed seeing anyone afraid of
him. It seemed to give him a morbid kind of pleasure.’

 ‘Quite so.’

 ‘He was an extremely well-read man, and a man of considerable intellect. But in some ways—well, I
didn’t come across that side of him myself, but it was there. I’m not really surprised his wife left him. This
wife, I mean. I don’t approve of her, mind. I’ve no opinion of that young woman at all. But in marrying
Lord Edgware she got all and more than she deserved. Well, she left him—and no bones broken, as they
say. But Geraldine couldn’t leave him. For a long time he’d forget all about her, and then, suddenly, he’d
remember. I sometimes think—though perhaps I shouldn’t say it—’

 ‘Yes, yes. Mademoiselle, say it.’

 ‘Well, I sometimes thought he revenged himself on the mother—his first wife—that way. She was a
gentle creature, I believe, with a very sweet disposition. I’ve always been sorry for her. I shouldn’t have
mentioned all this, M. Poirot, if it hadn’t been for that very foolish outburst of Geraldine’s just now.



Things she said—about hating her father—they might sound peculiar to anyone who didn’t know.’

 ‘Thank you verymuch, Mademoiselle. Lord Edgware, I fancy, was a man who would have done much
better not to marry.’

 ‘Much better.’

 ‘He never thought of marrying for a third time?’

 ‘How could he? His wife was alive.’

 ‘By giving her her freedom he would have been free himself.’

 ‘I should think he had had enough trouble with two wives as it was,’ said Miss Carroll grimly.

 ‘So you think there would have been no question of a third marriage. There was no one? Think,
Mademoiselle. No one?’

 Miss Carroll’s colour rose.

 ‘I cannot understand the way you keep harping on the point. Of course there was no one.’

 Chapter 14

 Five Questions

 ‘Why did you ask Miss Carroll about the possibility of Lord Edgware’s wanting to marry again?’ I
asked with some curiosity as we were driving home.

 ‘It just occurred to me that there was a possibility of such a thing,mon ami .’

 ‘Why?’

 ‘I have been searching in my mind for something to explain Lord Edgware’s suddenvolte face regarding
the matter of divorce. There is something curious there, my friend.’

 ‘Yes,’ I said thoughtfully. ‘It is rather odd.’

 ‘You see, Hastings, Lord Edgware confirmed what Madame had told us. She had employed the lawyers
of all kinds, but he refused to budge an inch. No, he would not agree to the divorce. And then, all of a
sudden, he yields!’

 ‘Or so he says,’ I reminded him.

 ‘Very true, Hastings. It is very just, the observation you make there.So he says . We have no proof,
whatever, that that letter was written.Eh bien , on one part,ce Monsieur is lying. For some reason he tells
us the fabrication, the embroidery. Is it not so? Why, we do not know. But, on the hypothesis that hedid
write that letter, there must have been areason for so doing. Now the reason that presents itself most
naturally to the imagination is that he has suddenly met someone whom he desires to marry. That explains
perfectly his sudden change of face. And so, naturally, I make the inquiries.’



 ‘Miss Carroll turned the idea down very decisively,’ I said.

 ‘Yes. Miss Carroll…’ said Poirot in a meditative voice.

 ‘Now what are you driving at?’ I asked in exasperation.

 Poirot is an adept at suggesting doubts by the tone of his voice.

 ‘What reason should she have for lying about it?’ I asked.

 ‘Aucune—aucune.’

 ‘But, you see, Hastings, it is difficult to trust her evidence.’

 ‘You think she’s lying? But why? She looks a most upright person.’

 ‘That is just it. Between the deliberate falsehood and the disinterested inaccuracy it is very hard to
distinguish sometimes.’

 ‘Whatdo you mean?’

 ‘To deceive deliberately—that is one thing. But to be so sure of your facts, of your ideas and of their
essential truth that the details do not matter—that, my friend, is a special characteristic of particularly
honest persons. Already, mark you, she has told us one lie. She said she saw JaneWilkinson Wilkinson’s face
when she could not possibly have done so. Now how did that come about? Look at it this way. She
looks down and sees JaneWilkinson Wilkinson in the hall. No doubt enters her head that itis JaneWilkinson Wilkinson. She
knows it is. She says she saw her face distinctly because—being so sure of her facts—exact details do
not matter! It is pointed out to her that she could not have seen her face. Is that so? Well, what does it
matter if she saw her face or not—itwas JaneWilkinson Wilkinson. And so with any other question. Sheknows .
And so she answers questions in the light of her knowledge, not by reason of remembered facts. The
positive witness should always be treated with suspicion, my friend. The uncertain witness who doesn’t
remember, isn’t sure, will think a minute—ah! yes, that’s how it was—is infinitely more to be depended
upon!’

 ‘Dear me, Poirot,’ I said. ‘You upset all my preconceived ideas about witnesses.’

 ‘In reply to my question as to Lord Edgware’s marrying again she ridicules the idea—simply because it
has never occurred to her. She will not take the trouble to remember whether any infinitesimal signs may
have pointed that way. Therefore we are exactly where we were before.’

 ‘She certainly did not seem at all taken aback when you pointed out she could not have seen JaneWilkinson
Wilkinson’s face,’ I remarked thoughtfully.

 ‘No. That is why I decided that she was one of those honestly inaccurate persons, rather than a
deliberate liar. I can see no motive for deliberate lying unless—true, that is an idea!’

 ‘What is?’ I asked eagerly.

 But Poirot shook his head.

 ‘An idea suggested itself to me. But it is too impossible—yes, much too impossible.’



 And he refused to say more.

 ‘She seems very fond of the girl,’ I said.

 ‘Yes. She certainly was determined to assist at our interview. What was your impression of the
Honourable Geraldine Marsh, Hastings?’

 ‘I was sorry for her—deeply sorry for her.’

 ‘You have always the tender heart, Hastings. Beauty in distress upsets you every time.’

 ‘Didn’t you feel the same?’

 He nodded gravely.

 ‘Yes—she has not had a happy life. That is written very clearly on her face.’

 ‘At any rate,’ I said warmly, ‘you realize how preposterous JaneWilkinson Wilkinson’s suggestion was—that she
should have had anything to do with the crime, I mean.’

 ‘Doubtless her alibi is satisfactory, but Japp has not communicated it to me as yet.’

 ‘My dear Poirot—do you mean to say that even after seeing her and talking to her, you are still not
satisfied and want an alibi?’

 ‘Eh bien, my friend, what is the result of seeing and talking to her? We perceive that she has passed
through great unhappiness, she admits that she hated her father and is glad that he is dead, and she is
deeply uneasy about what he may have said to us yesterday morning. And after that you say—no alibi is
necessary!’

 ‘Her mere frankness proves her innocence,’ I said warmly.

 ‘Frankness is a characteristic of the family. The new Lord Edgware—with what a gesture he laid his
cards on the table.’

 ‘He did indeed,’ I said, smiling at the remembrance. ‘Rather an original method.’

 Poirot nodded.

 ‘He—what do you say?—cut the ground before our feet.’

 ‘From under,’ I corrected. ‘Yes—it made us look rather foolish.’

 ‘What a curious idea. You may have looked foolish. I didn’t feel foolish in the least and I do not think I
looked it. On the contrary, my friend, I put him out of countenance.’

 ‘Did you?’ I said doubtfully, not remembering having seen signs of anything of the kind.

 ‘Si, si. I listen—and listen. And at last I ask a question about something quite different, and that, you
may have noticed, disconcerts our brave Monsieur very much. You do not observe, Hastings.’



 ‘I thought his horror and astonishment at hearing of Carlotta Adams’ death was genuine,’ I said. ‘I
suppose you will say it was a piece of clever acting.’

 ‘Impossible to tell. I agree itseemed genuine.’

 ‘Why do you think he flung all those facts at our head in that cynical way? Just for amusement?’

 ‘That is always possible. You English, you have the most extraordinary notions of humour. But it may
have been policy. Facts that are concealed acquire a suspicious importance. Facts that are frankly
revealed tend to be regarded as less important than they really are.’

 ‘The quarrel with his uncle that morning, for instance?’

 ‘Exactly. He knows that the fact is bound to leak out.Eh bien , he will parade it.’

 ‘He is not so foolish as he looks.’

 ‘Oh! he is not foolish at all. He has plenty of brains when he cares to use them. He sees exactly where
he stands and, as I said, he lays his cards on the table. You play the bridge, Hastings. Tell me, when does
one do that?’

 ‘You play bridge yourself,’ I said, laughing. ‘You know well enough—when all the rest of the tricks are
yours and you want to save time and get on to a new hand.’

 ‘Yes,mon ami , that is all very true. But occasionally there is another reason. I have remarked it once or
twice when playing withles dames . There is perhaps a little doubt.Eh bien, la dame , she throws down
the cards, says “and all the rest are mine,” and gathers up the cards and cuts the new pack. And possibly
the other players agree—especially if they are a little inexperienced. The thing is not obvious, mark you.
It requires to be followed out. Half-way through dealing the next hand, one of the players thinks: “Yes,
but she would have to have taken over that fourth diamond in dummy whether she wanted it or not, and
then she would have had to lead a little club and my nine would have made.”’

 ‘So you think?’

 ‘I think, Hastings, that too much bravado is a very interesting thing. And I also think that it is time we
dined.Une petite omelette, n’est ce pas? And after that, about nine o’clock, I have one more visit I wish
to make.’

 ‘Where is that?’

 ‘We will dine first, Hastings. And until we drink our coffee, we will not discuss the case further. When
engaged in eating, the brain should be the servant of the stomach.’

 Poirot was as good as his word. We went to a little restaurant in Soho where he was well known, and
there we had a delicious omelette, a sole, a chicken and aBaba au Rhum of which Poirot was inordinately
fond.

 Then, as we sipped our coffee, Poirot smiled affectionately across the table at me.

 ‘My good friend,’ he said. ‘I depend upon you more than you know.’



 I was confused and delighted by these unexpected words. He had never said anything of the kind to me
before. Sometimes, secretly, I had felt slightly hurt. He seemed almost to go out of his way to disparage
my mental powers.

 Although I did not think his own powers were flagging, I did realize suddenly that perhaps he had come
to depend on my aid more than he knew.

 ‘Yes,’ he said dreamily. ‘You may not always comprehend just how it is so—but you do often, and
often point the way.’

 I could hardly believe my ears.

 ‘Really, Poirot,’ I stammered. ‘I’m awfully glad, I suppose I’ve learnt a good deal from you one way or
another—’

 He shook his head.

 ‘Mais non, ce n’est pas ça. You have learnt nothing.’

 ‘Oh!’ I said, rather taken aback.

 ‘That is as it should be. No human being should learn from another. Each individual should develop his
own powers to the uttermost, not try to imitate those of someone else. I do not wish you to be a second
and inferior Poirot. I wish you to be the supreme Hastings. And you are the supreme Hastings. In you,
Hastings, I find the normal mind almost perfectly illustrated.’

 ‘I’m not abnormal, I hope,’ I said.

 ‘No, no. You are beautifully and perfectly balanced. In you sanity is personified. Do you realize what
that means to me? When the criminal sets out to do a crime his first effort is to deceive. Who does he
seek to deceive? The image in his mind is that of the normal man. There is probably no such thing
actually—it is a mathematical abstraction. But you come as near to realizing it as is possible. There are
moments when you have flashes of brilliance when you rise above the average, moments (I hope you will
pardon me) when you descend to curious depths of obtuseness, but take it all for all, you are amazingly
normal.Eh bien , how does this profit me? Simply in this way. As in a mirror I see reflected in your mind
exactly what the criminal wishes me to believe. That is terrifically helpful and suggestive.’

 I did not quite understand. It seemed to me that what Poirot was saying was hardly complimentary.
However, he quickly disabused me of that impression.

 ‘I have expressed myself badly,’ he said quickly. ‘You have an insight into the criminal mind, which I
myself lack. You show me what the criminal wishes me to believe. It is a great gift.’

 ‘Insight,’ I said thoughtfully. ‘Yes, perhaps I have got insight.’

 I looked across the table at him. He was smoking his tiny cigarettes and regarding me with great
kindliness.

 ‘Ce cherHastings,’ he murmured. ‘I have indeed much affection for you.’



 I was pleased but embarrassed and hastened to change the subject.

 ‘Come,’ I said in a business-like manner. ‘Let us discuss the case.’

 ‘Eh bien.’ Poirot threw his head back, his eyes narrowed. He slowly puffed out smoke.

 ‘Je me pose des questions,’ he said.

 ‘Yes?’ I said eagerly.

 ‘You, too, doubtless?’

 ‘Certainly,’ I said. And also leaning back and narrowing my own eyes I threw out:

 ‘Who killed Lord Edgware?’

 Poirot immediately sat up and shook his head vigorously.

 ‘No, no. Not at all. Is it a question, that? You are like someone who reads the detective story and who
starts guessing each of the characters in turn without rhyme or reason. Once, I agree, I had to do that
myself. It was a very exceptional case. I will tell you about it one of these days. It was a feather in my
cap. But of what were we speaking?’

 ‘Of the questions you were “posing” to yourself,’ I replied dryly. It was on the tip of my tongue to
suggest that my real use to Poirot was to provide him with a companion to whom he could boast, but I
controlled myself. If he wished to instruct then let him.

 ‘Come on,’ I said. ‘Let’s hear them.’

 That was all that the vanity of the man wanted. He leaned back again and resumed his former attitude.

 ‘The first question we have already discussed.Why did Lord Edgware change his mind on the subject of
divorce? One or two ideas suggest themselves to me on that subject. One of them you know.

 ‘The second question I ask myself isWhat happened to that letter? To whose interest was it that Lord
Edgware and his wife should continue to be tied together?

 ‘Three,What was the meaning of the expression on his face that you saw when you looked back
yesterday morning on leaving the library? Have you any answer to that, Hastings?’

 I shook my head.

 ‘I can’t understand it.’

 ‘You are sure that you didn’t imagine it? Sometimes, Hastings, you have the imaginationun peu vif .’

 ‘No, no.’ I shook my head vigorously. ‘I’m quite sure I wasn’t mistaken.’

 ‘Bien. Then it is a fact to be explained. My fourth question concerns those pince-nez. Neither JaneWilkinson
Wilkinson nor Carlotta Adams wore glasses. What, then, are the glasses doing in Carlotta Adams’ bag?



 ‘And for my fifth question.Why did someone telephone to find out if JaneWilkinson Wilkinson were at Chiswick
and who was it?

 ‘Those, my friend, are the questions with which I am tormenting myself. If I could answer those, I should
feel happier in my mind. If I could even evolve a theory that explained them satisfactorily, myamour
propre would not suffer so much.’

 ‘There are several other questions,’ I said.

 ‘Such as?’

 ‘Who incited Carlotta Adams to this hoax? Where was she that evening before and after ten o’clock?
Who is D who gave her the golden box?’

 ‘Those questions are self-evident,’ said Poirot. ‘There is no subtlety about them. They are simply things
we do not know. They are questions offact . We may get to know them any minute. My questions,mon
ami , are psychological. The little grey cells of the brain—’

 ‘Poirot,’ I said desperately. I felt that I must stop him at all costs. I could not bear to hear it all over
again. ‘You spoke of making a visit tonight?’

 Poirot looked at his watch.

 ‘True,’ he said. ‘I will telephone and find out if it is convenient.’

 He went away and returned a few minutes later.

 ‘Come,’ he said. ‘All is well.’

 ‘Where are we going?’ I asked.

 ‘To the house of Sir Montagu Corner at Chiswick. I would like to know a little more about that
telephone call.’

 Chapter 15

 Sir Montagu Corner

 It was about ten o’clock when we reached Sir Montagu Corner’s house on the river at Chiswick. It was
a big house standing back in its own grounds. We were admitted into a beautifully-panelled hall. On our
right, through an open door, we saw the dining-room with its long polished table lit with candles.

 ‘Will you come this way, please?’

 The butler led the way up a broad staircase and into a long room on the first floor overlooking the river.

 ‘M. Hercule Poirot,’ announced the butler.

 It was a beautifully-proportioned room, and had an old-world air with its carefully-shaded dim lamps. In
one corner of the room was a bridge table, set near the open window, and round it sat four people. As
we entered the room one of the four rose and came towards us.



 ‘It is a great pleasure to make your acquaintance, M. Poirot.’

 I looked with some interest at Sir Montagu Corner. He had a distinctly Jewish cast of countenance, very
small intelligent black eyes and a carefully-arranged toupee. He was a short man—five foot eight at most,
I should say. His manner was affected to the last degree.

 ‘Let me introduce you. Mr and Mrs Widburn.’

 ‘We’ve met before,’ said Mrs Widburn brightly.

 ‘And Mr Ross.’

 Ross was a young fellow of about twenty-two with a pleasant face and fair hair.

 ‘I disturb your game. A million apologies,’ said Poirot.

 ‘Not at all. We have not started. We were commencing to deal the cards only. Some coffee, M.
Poirot?’

 Poirot declined but accepted an offer of old brandy. It was brought us in immense goblets.

 As we sipped it, Sir Montagu discoursed.

 He spoke of Japanese prints, of Chinese lacquer, of Persian carpets, of the French Impressionists, of
modern music and of the theories of Einstein.

 Then he sat back and smiled at us beneficently. He had evidently thoroughly enjoyed his performance. In
the dim light he looked like some genie of the mediaeval age. All around the room were exquisite
examples of art and culture.

 ‘And now, Sir Montagu,’ said Poirot, ‘I will trespass on your kindness no longer but will come to the
object of my visit.’

 Sir Montagu waved a curious claw-like hand.

 ‘There is no hurry. Time is infinite.’

 ‘One always feels that in this house,’ sighed Mrs Widburn. ‘So wonderful.’

 ‘I would not live in London for a million pounds,’ said Sir Montagu. ‘Here one is in the old-world
atmosphere of peace that—alas!—we have put behind us in these jarring days.’

 A sudden impish fancy flashed over me that if someone were really to offer Sir Montagu a million
pounds, old-world peace might go to the wall, but I trod down such heretical sentiments.

 ‘What is money, after all?’ murmured Mrs Widburn.

 ‘Ah!’ said Mr Widburn thoughtfully, and rattled some coins absent-mindedly in his trouser pocket.

 ‘Charles,’ said Mrs Widburn reproachfully.



 ‘Sorry,’ said Mr Widburn and stopped.

 ‘To speak of crime in such an atmosphere, is, I feel, unpardonable,’ began Poirot apologetically.

 ‘Not at all.’ Sir Montagu waved a gracious hand. ‘A crime can be a work of art. A detective can be an
artist. I do not refer, of course, to the police. An inspector has been here today. A curious person. He
had never heard of Benvenuto Cellini, for instance.’

 ‘He came about JaneWilkinson Wilkinson, I suppose,’ said Mrs Widburn with instant curiosity.

 ‘It was fortunate for the lady that she was at your house last night,’ said Poirot.

 ‘So it seems,’ said Sir Montagu. ‘I asked her here knowing that she was beautiful and talented and
hoping that I might be able to be of use to her. She was thinking of going into management. But it seems
that I was fated to be of use to her in a very different way.’

 ‘JaneWilkinson’s got luck,’ said Mrs Widburn. ‘She’s been dying to get rid of Edgware and here’s somebody
gone and saved her the trouble. She’ll marry the young Duke of Merton now. Everyone says so. His
mother’s wild about it.’

 ‘I was favourably impressed by her,’ said Sir Montagu graciously. ‘She made several most intelligent
remarks about Greek art.’

 I smiled to myself picturing JaneWilkinson saying ‘Yes’ and ‘No’, ‘Really, how wonderful’, in her magical husky
voice. Sir Montagu was the type of man to whom intelligence consisted of the faculty of listening to his
own remarks with suitable attention.

 ‘Edgware was a queer fish, by all accounts,’ said Widburn. ‘I daresay he’s got a good few enemies.’

 ‘Is it true, M. Poirot,’ asked Mrs Widburn, ‘that somebody ran a penknife into the back of his brain?’

 ‘Perfectly true, Madame. It was very neatly and efficiently done—scientific, in fact.’

 ‘I note your artistic pleasure, M. Poirot,’ said Sir Montagu.

 ‘And now,’ said Poirot, ‘let me come to the object of my visit. Lady JaneWilkinson was called to the
telephone when she was here at dinner. It is about that telephone call that I seek information. Perhaps
you will allow me to question your domestics on the subject?’

 ‘Certainly. Certainly. Just press that bell, will you, Ross.’

 The butler answered the bell. He was a tall middle-aged man of ecclesiastical appearance.

 Sir Montagu explained what was wanted. The butler turned to Poirot with polite attention.

 ‘Who answered the telephone when it rang?’ began Poirot.

 ‘I answered it myself, sir. The telephone is in a recess leading out of the hall.’

 ‘Did the person calling ask to speak to Lady JaneWilkinson or to Miss JaneWilkinson Wilkinson?’



 ‘To Lady JaneWilkinson, sir.’

 ‘What did they say exactly?’

 The butler reflected for a moment.

 ‘As far as I remember, sir, I said “Hello”. A voice then asked if I was Chiswick 43434. I replied that
that was so. It then asked me to hold the line. Another voice then asked if that was Chiswick 43434 and
on my replying “Yes” it said, “Is Lady JaneWilkinson dining there?” I said her ladyshipwas dining here. The
voice said, “I would like to speak to her, please.” I went and informed her ladyship who was at the
dinner table. Her ladyship rose, and I showed her where the ’phone was.’

 ‘And then?’

 ‘Her ladyship picked up the receiver and said: “Hello—who’s speaking?” Then she said: “Yes—that’s
all right. Lady JaneWilkinson speaking.” I was just about to leave her ladyship when she called to me and said
they had been cut off. She said someone had laughed and evidently hung up the receiver. She asked me if
the person ringing up had given any name. They had not done so. That was all that occurred, sir.’

 Poirot frowned to himself.

 ‘Do you really think the telephone call has something to do with the murder, M. Poirot?’ asked Mrs
Widburn.

 ‘Impossible to say, Madame. It is just a curious circumstance.’

 ‘People do ring up for a joke sometimes. It’s been done to me.’

 ‘C’est toujours possible, Madame.’

 He spoke to the butler again.

 ‘Was it a man’s voice or a woman’s who rang up?’

 ‘A lady’s, I think, sir.’

 ‘What kind of a voice, high or low?’

 ‘Low, sir. Careful and rather distinct.’ He paused. ‘It may be my fancy, sir, but it sounded like aforeign
voice. The R’s were very noticeable.’

 ‘As far as that goes it might have been a Scotch voice, Donald,’ said Mrs Widburn, smiling at Ross.

 Ross laughed.

 ‘Not guilty,’ he said. ‘I was at the dinner table.’

 Poirot spoke once again to the butler.

 ‘Do you think,’ he asked, ‘that you could recognize that voice if you were to hear it any time?’



 The butler hesitated.

 ‘I couldn’t quite say, sir. I might do so. I think it is possible that I should do so.’

 ‘I thank you, my friend.’

 ‘Thank you, sir.’

 The butler inclined his head and withdrew, pontificial to the last.

 Sir Montagu Corner continued to be very friendly and to play his role of old-world charm. He
persuaded us to remain and play bridge. I excused myself—the stakes were bigger than I cared about.
Young Ross seemed relieved also at the prospect of someone taking his hand. He and I sat looking on
while the other four played. The evening ended in a heavy financial gain to Poirot and Sir Montagu.

 Then we thanked our host and took our departure. Ross came with us.

 ‘A strange little man,’ said Poirot as we stepped out into the night.

 The night was fine and we had decided to walk until we picked up a taxi instead of having one
telephoned for.

 ‘Yes, a strange little man,’ said Poirot again.

 ‘A very rich little man,’ said Ross with feeling.

 ‘I suppose so.’

 ‘He seems to have taken a fancy to me,’ said Ross. ‘Hope it will last. A man like that behind you means
a lot.’

 ‘You are an actor, Mr Ross?’

 Ross said that he was. He seemed sad that his name had not brought instant recognition. Apparently he
had recently won marvellous notices in some gloomy play translated from the Russian.

 When Poirot and I between us had soothed him down again, Poirot asked casually:

 ‘You knew Carlotta Adams, did you not?’

 ‘No. I saw her death announced in the paper tonight. Overdose of some drug or other. Idiotic the way
all these girls dope.’

 ‘It is sad, yes. She was clever, too.’

 ‘I suppose so.’

 He displayed a characteristic lack of interest in anyone else’s performance but his own.

 ‘Did you see her show at all?’ I asked.



 ‘No. That sort of thing’s not much in my line. Kind of craze for it at present, but I don’t think it will last.’

 ‘Ah!’ said Poirot. ‘Here is a taxi.’

 He waved a stick.

 ‘Think I’ll walk,’ said Ross. ‘I get a tube straight home from Hammersmith.’

 Suddenly he gave a nervous laugh.

 ‘Odd thing,’ he said. ‘That dinner last night.’

 ‘Yes?’

 ‘We were thirteen. Some fellow failed at the last minute. We never noticed till just the end of dinner.’

 ‘And who got up first?’ I asked.

 He gave a queer little nervous cackle of laughter.

 ‘I did,’ he said.

 Chapter 16

 Mainly Discussion

 When we got home we found Japp waiting for us.

 ‘Thought I’d just call round and have a chat with you before turning in, M. Poirot,’ he said cheerfully.

 ‘Eh bien, my good friend, how goes it?’

 ‘Well, it doesn’t go any too well. And that’s a fact.’

 He looked distressed.

 ‘Got any help for me, M. Poirot?’

 ‘I have one or two little ideas that I should like to present to you,’ said Poirot.

 ‘You and your ideas! In some ways, you know, you’re a caution. Not that I don’t want to hear them. I
do. There’s some good stuff in that funny-shaped head of yours.’

 Poirot acknowledged the compliment somewhat coldly.

 ‘Have you any ideas about the double lady problem—that’s what I want to know? Eh, M. Poirot? What
about it? Who was she?’

 ‘That is exactly what I wish to talk to you about.’



 He asked Japp if he had ever heard of Carlotta Adams.

 ‘I’ve heard the name. For the moment I can’t just place it.’

 Poirot explained.

 ‘Her! Does imitations does she? Now what made you fix on her? What have you got to go on?’

 Poirot related the steps we had taken and the conclusion we had drawn.

 ‘By the Lord, it looks as though you were right. Clothes, hat, gloves, etc., and the fair wig. Yes, it must
be. I will say—you’re the goods, M. Poirot. Smart work, that! Not that I think there’s anything to show
she was put out of the way. That seems a bit far fetched. I don’t quite see eye to eye with you there.
Your theory is a bit fantastical for me. I’ve more experience than you have. I don’t believe in this
villain-behind-the-scenes motif. Carlotta Adams was the woman all right, but I should put it one of two
ways. She went there for purposes of her own—blackmail, maybe, since she hinted she was going to get
money. They had a bit of a dispute. He turned nasty, she turned nasty, and she finished him off. And I
should say that when she got home she went all to pieces. She hadn’t meant murder. It’s my belief she
took an overdose on purpose as the easiest way out.’

 ‘You think that covers all the facts?’

 ‘Well, naturally there are a lot of things we don’t know yet. It’s a good working hypothesis to go on
with. The other explanation is that the hoax and the murder had nothing to do with each other. It’s just a
damned queer coincidence.’

 Poirot did not agree, I knew. But he merely said noncommittally:

 ‘Mais oui, c’est possible.’

 ‘Or, look here, how’s this? The hoax is innocent enough. Someone gets to hear of it and thinks it will suit
their purpose jolly well. That’s not a bad idea?’ He paused and went on: ‘But personally I prefer idea
No. 1. What the link was between his lordship and the girl we’ll find out somehow or other.’

 Poirot told him of the letter to America posted by the maid, and Japp agreed that that might possibly be
of great assistance.

 ‘I’ll get on to that at once,’ he said, making a note of it in his little book.

 ‘I’m the more in favour of the lady being the killer because I can’t find anyone else,’ he said, as he put
the book away. ‘RonaldMarsh, now, his lordship as now is. He’s got a motive sticking out a yard. A
bad record too. Hard up and none too scrupulous over money. What’s more he had a row with his uncle
yesterday morning. He told me that himself as a matter of fact—which rather takes the taste out of it.
Yes, he’d be a likely customer. But he’s got an alibi for yesterday evening. He was at the opera with the
Dortheimers. Rich Jews. Grosvenor Square. I’ve looked into that and it’s all right. He dined with them,
went to the opera and they went on to supper at Sobranis. So that’s that.’

 ‘And Mademoiselle?’

 ‘The daughter, you mean? She was out of the house too. Dined with some people called Carthew West.
They took her to the opera and saw her home afterwards. Quarter to twelve she got in. That disposes of



her . The secretary woman seems all right—very efficient decent woman. Then there’s the butler. I can’t
say I take to him much. It isn’t natural for a man to have good looks like that. There’s something fishy
about him—and something odd about the way he came to enter Lord Edgware’s service. Yes, I’m
checking up on him all right. I can’t see any motive for murder, though.’

 ‘No fresh facts have come to light?’

 ‘Yes, one or two. It’s hard to say whether they mean anything or not. For one thing, Lord Edgware’s
key’s missing.’

 ‘The key to the front door?’

 ‘Yes.’

 ‘That is interesting, certainly.’

 ‘As I say, it may mean a good deal or nothing at all. Depends. Whatis a bit more significant to my mind
is this. Lord Edgware cashed a cheque yesterday—not a particularly large one—a hundred pounds as a
matter of fact. He took the money in French notes—that’s why he cashed the cheque, because of his
journey to Paris today. Well, that money has disappeared.’

 ‘Who told you of this?’

 ‘Miss Carroll. She cashed the cheque and obtained the money. She mentioned it to me, and then I found
that it had gone.’

 ‘Where was it yesterday evening?’

 ‘Miss Carroll doesn’t know. She gave it to Lord Edgware about half-past three. It was in a bank
envelope. He was in the library at the time. He took it and laid it down beside him on a table.’

 ‘That certainly gives one to think. It is a complication.’

 ‘Or a simplification. By the way—the wound.’

 ‘Yes?’

 ‘The doctor says it wasn’t made by an ordinary penknife. Something of that kind but a different shaped
blade. And it was amazingly sharp.’

 ‘Not a razor?’

 ‘No, no. Much smaller.’

 Poirot frowned thoughtfully.

 ‘The new Lord Edgware seems to be fond of his joke,’ remarked Japp. ‘He seems to think it amusing to
be suspected of murder. He made sure wedid suspect him of murder, too. Looks a bit queer, that.’

 ‘It might be merely intelligence.’



 ‘More likely guilty conscience. His uncle’s death came very pat for him. He’s moved into the house, by
the way.’

 ‘Where was he living before?’

 ‘Martin Street, St George’s Road. Not a very swell neighbourhood.’

 ‘You might make a note of that, Hastings.’

 I did so, though I wondered a little. If RonaldMarsh had moved to Regent Gate, his former address was hardly
likely to be needed.

 ‘Ithink the Adams girl did it,’ said Japp, rising. ‘A fine bit of work on your part, M. Poirot, to tumble to
that. But there, of course, you go about to theatres and amusing yourself. Things strike you that don’t get
the chance of striking me. Pity there’s no apparent motive, but a little spade work will soon bring it to
light, I expect.’

 ‘There is one person with a motive to whom you have given no attention,’ remarked Poirot.

 ‘Who’s that, sir?’

 ‘The gentleman who is reputed to have wanted to marry Lord Edgware’s wife. I mean the Duke of
Merton.’

 ‘Yes. I suppose there is amotive .’ Japp laughed. ‘But a gentleman in his position isn’t likely to do
murder. And anyway, he’s over in Paris.’

 ‘You do not regard him as a serious suspect, then?’

 ‘Well, M. Poirot, do you?’

 And laughing at the absurdity of the idea, Japp left us.

 Chapter 17

 The Butler

 The following day was one of inactivity for us, and activity for Japp. He came round to see us about
teatime.

 He was red and wrathful.

 ‘I’ve made a bloomer.’

 ‘Impossible, my friend,’ said Poirot soothingly.

 ‘Yes, I have. I’ve let that (here he gave way to profanity)—of a butler slip through my fingers.’

 ‘He has disappeared?’

 ‘Yes. Hooked it. What makes me kick myself for a double-dyed idiot is that I didn’t particularly suspect



him.’

 ‘Calm yourself—but calm yourself then.’

 ‘All very well to talk.You wouldn’t be calm if you’d been hauled over the coals at headquarters. Oh!
he’s a slippery customer. It isn’t the first time he’s given anyone the slip. He’s an old hand.’

 Japp wiped his forehead and looked the picture of misery. Poirot made sympathetic noises—somewhat
suggestive of a hen laying an egg. With more insight into the English character, I poured out a stiff whisky
and soda and placed it in front of the gloomy inspector. He brightened a little.

 ‘Well,’ he said. ‘I don’t mind if I do.’

 Presently he began to talk more cheerfully.

 ‘I’m not so sure even now that he’s the murderer! Of course it looks bad his bolting this way, but there
might be other reasons for that. I’d begun to get on to him, you see. Seems he’s mixed up with a couple
of disreputable night clubs. Not the usual thing. Something a great deal more recherché and nasty. In fact,
he’s a real bad hat.’

 ‘Tout de même, that does not necessarily mean that he is a murderer.’

 ‘Exactly! He may have been up to some funny business or other, but not necessarily murder. No, I’m
more than ever convinced it was the Adams girl. I’ve got nothing to prove it as yet, though. I’ve had men
going all through her flat today, but we’ve found nothing that’s helpful. She was a canny one. Kept no
letters except a few business ones about financial contracts. They’re all neatly docketed and labelled.
Couple of letters from her sister in Washington. Quite straight and above-board. One or two pieces of
good old-fashioned jewellery—nothing new or expensive. She didn’t keep a diary. Her pass-book and
cheque-book don’t show anything helpful. Dash it all, the girl doesn’t seem to have had any private life at
all!’

 ‘She was of a reserved character,’ said Poirot thoughtfully. ‘From our point of view that is a pity.’

 ‘I’ve talked to the woman who did for her. Nothing there. I’ve been and seen that girl who keeps a hat
shop and who, it seems, was a friend of hers.’

 ‘Ah! and what do you think of Miss Driver?’

 ‘She seemed a smart wide-awake bit of goods. She couldn’t help me, though. Not that that surprises
me. The amount of missing girls I’ve had to trace and their family and their friends always say the same
things. “She was of a bright and affectionate disposition and had no men friends.” That’s never true. It’s
unnatural. Girls ought to have men friends. If not there’s something wrong with them. It’s the
muddle-headed loyalty of friends and relations that makes a detective’s life so difficult.’

 He paused for want of breath, and I replenished his glass.

 ‘Thank you, Captain Hastings, I don’t mind if I do. Well, there you are. You’ve got to hunt and hunt
about. There’s about a dozen young men she went out to supper and danced with, but nothing to show
that one of them meant more than another. There’s the present Lord Edgware, there’s Mr Bryan Martin,
the film star, there’s half a dozen others—but nothing special and particular. Your man behind idea is all
wrong. I think you’ll find that she played a lone hand, M. Poirot. I’m looking now for the connection



between her and the murdered man. That must exist. I think I’ll have to go over to Paris. There was Paris
written in that little gold box, and the late Lord Edgware ran over to Paris several times last Autumn, so
Miss Carroll tells me, attending sales and buying curios. Yes, I think I must go over to Paris. Inquest’s
tomorrow. It’ll be adjourned, of course. After that I’ll take the afternoon boat.’

 ‘You have a furious energy, Japp. It amazes me.’

 ‘Yes, you’re getting lazy. You just sit here andthink ! What you call employing the little grey cells. No
good, you’ve got to go out to things. They won’t come to you.’

 The little maidservant opened the door.

 ‘Mr Bryan Martin, sir. Are you busy or will you see him?’

 ‘I’m off, M. Poirot.’ Japp hoisted himself up. ‘All the stars of the theatrical world seem to consult you.’

 Poirot shrugged a modest shoulder, and Japp laughed.

 ‘You must be a millionaire by now, M. Poirot. What do you do with the money? Save it?’

 ‘Assuredly I practise the thrift. And talking of the disposal of money, how did Lord Edgware dispose of
his?’

 ‘Such property as wasn’t entailed he left to his daughter. Five hundred to Miss Carroll. No other
bequests. Very simple will.’

 ‘And it was made—when?’

 ‘After his wife left him—just over two years ago. He expressly excludes her from participation, by the
way.’

 ‘A vindictive man,’ murmured Poirot to himself.

 With a cheerful ‘So long,’ Japp departed.

 Bryan Martin entered. He was faultlessly attired and looked extremely handsome. Yet I thought that he
looked haggard and not too happy.

 ‘I am afraid I have been a long time coming, M. Poirot,’ he said apologetically. ‘And, after all, I have
been guilty of taking up your time for nothing.’

 ‘En verité?’

 ‘Yes. I have seen the lady in question. I’ve argued with her, pleaded with her, but all to no purpose. She
won’t hear of my interesting you in the matter. So I’m afraid we’ll have to let the thing drop. I’m very
sorry—very sorry to have bothered you—’

 ‘Du tout—du tout,’ said Poirot genially. ‘I expected this.’

 ‘Eh?’ The young man seemed taken aback.



 ‘You expected this?’ he asked in a puzzled way.

 ‘Mais oui. When you spoke of consulting your friend—I could have predicted that all would have
arrived as it has done.’

 ‘You have a theory, then?’

 ‘A detective, M. Martin, always has a theory. It is expected of him. I do not call it a theory myself. I say
that I have a little idea. That is the first stage.’

 ‘And the second stage?’

 ‘If the little idea turns out to be right—then Iknow ! It is quite simple, you see.’

 ‘I wish you’d tell me what your theory—or your little idea—is?’

 Poirot shook his head gently.

 ‘That is another rule. The detective never tells.’

 ‘Can’t you suggest it even?’

 ‘No. I will only say that I formed my theory as soon as you mentioned a gold tooth.’

 Bryan Martin stared at him.

 ‘I’m absolutely bewildered,’ he declared. ‘I can’t make out what you are driving at. If you’d just give
me a hint.’

 Poirot smiled and shook his head.

 ‘Let us change the subject.’

 ‘Yes, but first—your fee—you must let me.’

 Poirot waved an imperious hand.

 ‘Pas un sou! I have done nothing to aid you.’

 ‘I took up your time—’

 ‘When a case interests me, I do not touch money. Your case interested me very much.’

 ‘I’m glad,’ said the actor uneasily.

 He looked supremely unhappy.

 ‘Come,’ said Poirot kindly. ‘Let us talk of something else.’

 ‘Wasn’t that the Scotland Yard man whom I met on the stairs?’



 ‘Yes, Inspector Japp.’

 ‘The light was so dim, I wasn’t sure. By the way, he came round and asked me some questions about
that poor girl, Carlotta Adams, who died of an overdose of veronal.’

 ‘You knew her well—Miss Adams?’

 ‘Not very well. I knew her as a child in America. I came across her here once or twice but I never saw
very much of her. I was very sorry to hear of her death.’

 ‘You liked her?’

 ‘Yes. She was extraordinarily easy to talk to.’

 ‘A personality very sympathetic—yes, I found the same.’

 ‘I suppose they think it might be suicide? I knew nothing that could help the inspector. Carlotta was
always very reserved about herself.’

 ‘I do not think it was suicide,’ said Poirot.

 ‘Far more likely to be an accident, I agree.’

 There was a pause.

 Then Poirot said with a smile:

 ‘The affair of Lord Edgware’s death becomes intriguing, does it not?’

 ‘Absolutely amazing. Do you know—have they any idea—who did it—now that JaneWilkinson is definitely out of
it?’

 ‘Mais oui—they have a very strong suspicion.’

 Bryan Martin looked excited.

 ‘Really? Who?’

 ‘The butler has disappeared. You comprehend—flight is as good as a confession.’

 ‘The butler! Really, you surprise me.’

 ‘A singularly good-looking man.Il vous ressemble un peu .’ He bowed in a complimentary fashion.

 Of course! I realized now why the butler’s face had struck me as being faintly familiar when I first saw it.

 ‘You flatter me,’ said Bryan Martin with a laugh.

 ‘No, no, no. Do not all the young girls, the servant girls, the flappers, the typists, the girls of society, do
they not all adore M. Bryan Martin? Is there one who can resist you?’



 ‘A lot, I should think,’ said Martin. He got up abruptly.

 ‘Well, thank you very much, M. Poirot. Let me apologize again for having troubled you.’

 He shook hands with us both. Suddenly, I noticed he looked much older. The haggard look was more
apparent.

 I was devoured with curiosity, and as soon as the door closed behind him, I burst out with what I
wanted to know.

 ‘Poirot, did you really expect him to come back and relinquish all idea of investigating those queer things
that happened to him in America?’

 ‘You heard me say so, Hastings.’

 ‘But then—’ I followed the thing out logically.

 ‘Then you must know who this mysterious girl is that he had to consult?’

 He smiled.

 ‘I have a little idea, my friend. As I told you, it started from the mention of the gold tooth, and if my little
idea is correct, I know who the girl is, I know why she will not let M. Martin consult me. I know the truth
of the whole affair. And so could you know it if you would only use the brains the good God has given
you. Sometimes I really am tempted to believe that by inadvertence He passed you by.’

 Chapter 18

 The Other Man

 I do not propose to describe either the inquest on Lord Edgware or that on Carlotta Adams. In
Carlotta’s case the verdict was Death by Misadventure. In the case of Lord Edgware the inquest was
adjourned, after evidence of identification and the medical evidence had been given. As a result of the
analysis of the stomach, the time of death was fixed as having occurred not less than an hour after the
completion of dinner, with possible extension to an hour after that. This put it as between ten and eleven
o’clock, with the probability in favour of the earlier time.

 None of the facts concerning Carlotta’s impersonation of JaneWilkinson Wilkinson were allowed to leak out. A
description of the wanted butler was published in the press, and the general impression seemed to be that
the butler was the man wanted. His story of JaneWilkinson Wilkinson’s visit was looked upon as an impudent
fabrication. Nothing was said of the secretary’s corroborating testimony. There were columns concerning
the murder in all the papers, but little real information.

 Meanwhile Japp was actively at work, I knew. It vexed me a little that Poirot adopted such an inert
attitude. The suspicion that approaching old age had something to do with it flashed across me—not for
the first time. He made excuses to me which did not ring very convincingly.

 ‘At my time of life one saves oneself the trouble,’ he explained.

 ‘But, Poirot, my dear fellow, you mustn’t think of yourself as old,’ I protested.



 I felt that he needed bracing. Treatment by suggestion—that, I know, is the modern idea.

 ‘You are as full of vigour as ever you were,’ I said earnestly. ‘You’re in the prime of life, Poirot. At the
height of your powers. You could go out and solve this case magnificently if you only would.’

 Poirot replied that he preferred to solve it sitting at home.

 ‘But you can’t do that, Poirot.’

 ‘Not entirely, it is true.’

 ‘What I mean is, we are doing nothing! Japp is doing everything.’

 ‘Which suits me admirably.’

 ‘It doesn’t suit me at all. I want you to be doing things.’

 ‘So I am.’

 ‘What are you doing?’

 ‘Waiting.’

 ‘Waiting for what?’

 ‘Pour que mon chien de chasse me rapporte le gibier,’ replied Poirot with a twinkle.

 ‘Whatdo you mean?’

 ‘I mean the good Japp. Why keep a dog and bark yourself? Japp brings us here the result of the
physical energy you admire so much. He has various means at his disposal which I have not. He will have
news for us very soon, I do not doubt.’

 By dint of persistent inquiry, it was true that Japp was slowly getting together material. He had drawn a
blank in Paris, but a couple of days later he came in looking pleased with himself.

 ‘It’s slow work,’ he said. ‘But we’re getting somewhere at last.’

 ‘I congratulate you, my friend. What has happened?’

 ‘I’ve discovered that a fair-haired lady deposited an attaché-case in the cloak-room at Euston at nine
o’clock that night. They’ve been shown Miss Adams’ case and identify it positively. It’s of American
make and so just a little different.’

 ‘Ah! Euston. Yes, the nearest of the big stations to Regent Gate. She went there doubtless, made herself
up in the lavatory, and then left the case. When was it taken out again?’

 ‘At half-past ten. The clerk says by the same lady.’

 Poirot nodded.



 ‘And I’ve come on something else too. I’ve reason to believe that Carlotta Adams was in Lyons Corner
House in the Strand at eleven o’clock.’

 ‘Ah! c’est três bien ça!How did you come across that?’

 ‘Well, really more or less by chance. You see, there’s been a mention in the papers of the little gold box
with the ruby initials. Some reporter wrote it up—he was doing an article on the prevalence of
dope-taking among young actresses. Sunday paper romantic stuff. The fatal little gold box with its deadly
contents—pathetic figure of a young girl with all the world before her! And just a wonder expressed as to
where she passed her last evening and how she felt and so on and so on.

 ‘Well, it seems a waitress at the Corner House read this and she remembered that a lady she had served
that evening had had such a box in her hand. She remembered the C.A. on it. And she got excited and
began talking to all her friends—perhaps a paper would give her something?

 ‘A young newspaper man soon got on to it and there’s going to be a good sobstuff article in tonight’s
Evening Shriek . The last hours of the talented actress. Waiting—for the man who never came—and a
good bit about the actress’s sympathetic intuition that something was not well with her sister woman. You
know the kind of bilge, M. Poirot?’

 ‘And how has it come to your ears so quickly?’

 ‘Oh! well, we’re on very good terms with theEvening Shriek . It got passed on to me while their
particular bright young man tried to get some news out of me about something else. So I rushed along to
the Corner House straight away—’

 Yes, that was the way things ought to be done. I felt a pang of pity for Poirot. Here was Japp getting all
this news at first hand—quite possibly missing valuable details, and here was Poirot placidly content with
stale news.

 ‘I saw the girl—and I don’t think there’s much doubt about it. She couldn’t pick out Carlotta Adams’
photograph, but then she said she didn’t notice the lady’s face particularly. She was young and dark and
slim, and very well dressed, the girl said. Had got on one of the new hats. I wish women looked at faces
a bit more and hats a bit less.’

 ‘The face of Miss Adams is not an easy one to observe,’ said Poirot. ‘It had the mobility, the
sensitiveness—the fluid quality.’

 ‘I daresay you’re right. I don’t go in for analysing these things. Dressed in black the lady was, so the girl
said, and she had an attaché-case with her. The girl noticed that particularly, because it struck her as odd
that a lady so well dressed should be carrying a case about. She ordered some scrambled eggs and some
coffee, but the girl thinks she was putting in time and waiting for someone. She’d got a wrist-watch on
and she kept looking at it. It was when the girl came to give her the bill that she noticed the box. The lady
took it out of her handbag and had it on the table looking at it. She opened the lid and shut it down again.
She was smiling in a pleased dreamy sort of way. The girl noticed the box particularly because it was
such a lovely thing. “I’d like to have a gold box with my initials in rubies on it!” she said.

 ‘Apparently Miss Adams sat there some time after paying her bill. Then, finally, she looked at her watch
once more, seemed to give it up and went out.’

 Poirot was frowning.



 ‘It was arendez-vous ,’ he murmured. ‘Arendez-vous with someone who did not turn up. Did Carlotta
Adams meet that person afterwards? Or did she fail to meet him and go home and try to ring him up? I
wish I knew—oh! how I wish I knew.’

 ‘That’syour theory, M. Poirot. Mysterious Man-in-the-Background. That Man-in-the-Background’s a
myth. I don’t say she mayn’t have been waiting for someone—that’s possible. She may have made an
appointment to meet someone there after her business with his lordship was settled satisfactorily. Well,
we know what happened. She lost her head and stabbed him. But she’s not one to lose her head for
long. She changes her appearance at the station, gets out the case, goes to the rendezvous, and then what
they call the “reaction” gets her. Horror of what she’d done. And when her friend doesn’t turn up, that
finished her. He may be someone who knew she was going to Regent Gate that evening. She feels the
game’s up. So she takes out her little box of dope. An overdose of that and it’ll be all over. At any rate
she won’t be hanged. Why, it’s as plain as the nose on your face.’

 Poirot’s hand strayed doubtfully to his nose, then his fingers dropped to his moustaches. He caressed
them tenderly with a proud expression.

 ‘There was no evidence at all of a mysterious Man-in-the-Background,’ said Japp, pursuing his
advantage doggedly. ‘I haven’t got evidence yet of a connection between her and his lordship, but I shall
do—it’s only a question of time. I must say I’m disappointed about Paris, but nine months ago is a long
time. I’ve still got someone making inquiries over there. Something may come to light yet. I know you
don’t think so. You’re a pig-headed old boy, you know.’

 ‘You insult first my nose and then my head!’

 ‘Figure of speech, that’s all,’ said Japp soothingly. ‘No offence meant.’

 ‘The answer to that,’ I said, ‘is “nor taken.”’

 Poirot looked from one to the other of us completely puzzled.

 ‘Any orders?’ inquired Japp facetiously from the door. Poirot smiled forgivingly at him.

 ‘An order, no. A suggestion—yes.’

 ‘Well, what is it? Out with it.’

 ‘A suggestion that you circularize the taxi-cabs. Find one that took a fare—or more probably two
fares—yes, two fares—from the neighbourhood of Covent Garden to Regent Gate on the night of the
murder. As to time it would probably be about twenty minutes to eleven.’

 Japp cocked an eye alertly. He had the look of a smart terrier dog.

 ‘So, that’s the idea, is it?’ he said. ‘Well, I’ll do it. Can’t do any harm—and you sometimes know what
you’re talking about.’

 No sooner had he left than Poirot arose and with great energy began to brush his hat.

 ‘Ask me no questions, my friend. Instead bring me the benzine. A morsel of omelette this morning
descended on my waistcoat.’



 I brought it to him.

 ‘For once,’ I said. ‘I do not think I need to ask questions. It seems fairly obvious. But do you think it
really is so?’

 ‘Mon ami, at the moment I concern myself solely with the toilet. If you will pardon me saying so, your tie
does not please me.’

 ‘It’s a jolly good tie,’ I said.

 ‘Possibly—once. It feels the old age as you have been kind enough to say I do. Change it, I beseech
you, and also brush the right sleeve.’

 ‘Are we proposing to call on King George?’ I inquired sarcastically.

 ‘No. But I saw in the newspaper this morning that the Duke of Merton had returned to Merton House. I
understand he is a premier member of the English aristocracy. I wish to do him all honour.’

 There is nothing of the Socialist about Poirot.

 ‘Why are we going to call on the Duke of Merton?’

 ‘I wish to see him.’

 That was all I could get out of him. When my attire was at last handsome enough to please Poirot’s
critical eye, we started out.

 At Merton House, Poirot was asked by a footman if he had an appointment. Poirot replied in the
negative. The footman bore away the card and returned shortly to say that His Grace was very sorry but
he was extremely busy this morning. Poirot immediately sat down in a chair.

 ‘Trés bien,’ he said. ‘I wait. I will wait several hours if need be.’

 This, however, was not necessary. Probably as the shortest way of getting rid of the importunate caller,
Poirot was bidden to the presence of the gentleman he desired to see.

 The Duke was about twenty-seven years of age. He was hardly prepossessing in appearance, being thin
and weakly. He had nondescript thin hair going bald at the temples, a small bitter mouth and vague
dreamy eyes. There were several crucifixes in the room and various religious works of art. A wide shelf
of books seemed to contain nothing but theological works. He looked far more like a weedy young
haberdasher than like a duke. He had, I knew, been educated at home, having been a terribly delicate
child. This was the man who had fallen an immediate prey to JaneWilkinson Wilkinson! It was really ludicrous in
the extreme. His manner was priggish and his reception of us just short of courteous.

 ‘You may, perhaps, know my name,’ began Poirot.

 ‘I have no acquaintance with it.’

 ‘I study the psychology of crime.’



 The Duke was silent. He was sitting at a writing-table, an unfinished letter before him. He tapped
impatiently on the desk with his pen.

 ‘For what reason do you wish to see me?’ he inquired coldly.

 Poirot was sitting opposite him. His back was to the window. The Duke was facing it.

 ‘I am at present engaged on investigating the circumstances connected with Lord Edgware’s death.’

 Not a muscle of the weak but obstinate face moved.

 ‘Indeed? I was not acquainted with him.’

 ‘But you are, I think, acquainted with his wife—with Miss JaneWilkinson Wilkinson?’

 ‘That is so.’

 ‘You are aware that she is supposed to have had a strong motive for desiring the death of her husband?’

 ‘I am really not aware of anything of the kind.’

 ‘I should like to ask you outright, Your Grace. Are you shortly going to marry Miss JaneWilkinson Wilkinson?’

 ‘When I am engaged to marry anyone the fact will be announced in the newspapers. I consider your
question an impertinence.’ He stood up. ‘Good morning.’

 Poirot stood up also. He looked awkward. He hung his head. He stammered.

 ‘I did not mean…I…Je vous demande pardon…’

 ‘Good morning,’ repeated the Duke, a little louder.

 This time Poirot gave it up. He made a characteristic gesture of hopelessness, and we left. It was an
ignominious dismissal.

 I felt rather sorry for Poirot. His usual bombast had not gone well. To the Duke of Merton a great
detective was evidently lower than a black beetle.

 ‘That didn’t go too well,’ I said sympathetically. ‘What a stiff-necked tartar that man is. What did you
really want to see him for?’

 ‘I wanted to know whether he and JaneWilkinson Wilkinson are really going to marry.’

 ‘She said so.’

 ‘Ah! she said so. But, you realize, she is one of those who say anything that suits their purpose. She
might have decided to marry him and he—poor man—might not yet be aware of the fact.’

 ‘Well, he certainly sent you away with a flea in the ear.’

 ‘He gave me the reply he would give to a reporter—yes.’ Poirot chuckled. ‘But I know! I know exactly



how the case stands.’

 ‘How do you know? By his manner?’

 ‘Not at all. You saw he was writing a letter?’

 ‘Yes.’

 ‘Eh bien, in my early days in the police force in Belgium I learned that it was very useful to read
handwriting upside down. Shall I tell you what he was saying in that letter? “My dearest JaneWilkinson, my adored,
my beautiful angel, how can I tell you what you are to me? You who have suffered so much! Your
beautiful nature—”’

 ‘Poirot!’ I cried, scandalized, stopping him.

 ‘That was as far as he had got. “Your beautiful nature—only I know it.”’

 I felt very upset. He was so naively pleased with his performance.

 ‘Poirot,’ I cried. ‘You can’t do a thing like that. Overlook a private letter.’

 ‘You say the imbecilities, Hastings. Absurd to say I “cannot do” a thing which I have just done!’

 ‘It’s not—not playing the game.’

 ‘I do not play games. You know that. Murder is not a game. It is serious. And anyway, Hastings, you
should not use that phrase—playing the game. It is not said any more. I have discovered that. It is dead.
Young people laugh when they hear it.Mais oui , young beautiful girls will laugh at you if you say “playing
the game” and “not cricket”.’

 I was silent. I could not bear this thing that Poirot had done so light-heartedly.

 ‘It was so unnecessary,’ I said. ‘If you had only told him that you had gone to Lord Edgware at JaneWilkinson
Wilkinson’s request, then he would have treated you very differently.’

 ‘Ah! but I couldn’t do that. JaneWilkinson Wilkinson was my client. I cannot speak of my client’s affairs to
another. I undertake a mission in confidence. To speak of it would not be honourable.’

 ‘Honourable!’

 ‘Precisely.’

 ‘But she’s going to marry him?’

 ‘That does not mean that she has no secrets from him. Your ideas about marriage are very
old-fashioned. No, what you suggest, I couldn’t possibly have done. I have my honour as a detective to
think of. The honour, it is a very serious thing.’

 ‘Well, I suppose it takes all kinds of honour to make a world.’

 Chapter 19



 A Great Lady

 The visit that we received on the following morning was to my mind one of the most surprising things
about the whole affair.

 I was in my sitting room when Poirot slipped in with his eyes shining.

 ‘Mon ami, we have a visitor.’

 ‘Who is it?’

 ‘The Dowager Duchess of Merton.’

 ‘How extraordinary! What does she want?’

 ‘If you accompany me downstairs,mon ami , you will know.’

 I hastened to comply. We entered the room together.

 The Duchess was a small woman with a high-bridged nose and autocratic eyes. Although she was short
one would not have dared to call her dumpy. Dressed though she was in unfashionable black, she was
yet every inch agrande dame . She also impressed me as having an almost ruthless personality. Where
her son was negative, she was positive. Her will-power was terrific. I could almost feel waves of force
emanating from her. No wonder this woman had always dominated all those with whom she came in
contact!

 She put up a lorgnette and studied first me and then my companion. Then she spoke to him. Her voice
was clear and compelling, a voice accustomed to command and to be obeyed.

 ‘You are M. Hercule Poirot?’

 My friend bowed.

 ‘At your service, Madame la Duchesse.’

 She looked at me.

 ‘This is my friend, Captain Hastings. He assists me in my cases.’

 Her eyes looked momentarily doubtful. Then she bent her head in acquiescence.

 She took the chair that Poirot offered.

 ‘I have come to consult you on a very delicate matter, M. Poirot, and I must ask that what I tell you shall
be understood to be entirely confidential.’

 ‘That goes without saying, Madame.’

 ‘It was Lady Yardly who told me about you. From the way in which she spoke of you and the gratitude
she expressed, I felt that you were the only person likely to help me.’



 ‘Rest assured, I will do my best, Madame.’

 Still she hesitated. Then, at last, with an effort, she came to the point, came to it with a simplicity that
reminded me in an odd way of JaneWilkinson Wilkinson on that memorable night at the Savoy.

 ‘M. Poirot, I want you to ensure that my son does not marry the actress, JaneWilkinson Wilkinson.’

 If Poirot felt astonishment, he refrained from showing it. He regarded her thoughtfully and took his time
about replying.

 ‘Can you be a little more definite, Madame, as to what you want me to do?’

 ‘That is not easy. I feel that such a marriage would be a great disaster. It would ruin my son’s life.’

 ‘Do you think so, Madame?’

 ‘I am sure of it. My son has very high ideals. He knows really very little of the world. He has never
cared for the young girls of his own class. They have struck him as empty-headed and frivolous. But as
regards this woman—well, she is very beautiful, I admit that. And she has the power of enslaving men.
She has bewitched my son. I have hoped that the infatuation would run its course. Mercifully she was not
free. But now that her husband is dead—’

 She broke off.

 ‘They intend to be married in a few months’ time. The whole happiness of my son’s life is at stake.’ She
spoke more peremptorily. ‘It must be stopped, M. Poirot.’

 Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

 ‘I do not say that you are not right, Madame. I agree that the marriage is not a suitable one. But what
can one do?’

 ‘It is for you to do something.’

 Poirot slowly shook his head.

 ‘Yes, yes, you must help me.’

 ‘I doubt if anything would avail, Madame. Your son, I should say, would refuse to listen to anything
against the lady! And also, I do not think there is very much against her to say! I doubt if there are any
discreditable incidents to be raked up in her past. She has been—shall we say—careful?’

 ‘I know,’ said the Duchess grimly.

 ‘Ah! So you have already made the inquiries in that direction.’

 She flushed a little under his keen glance.

 ‘There is nothing I would not do, M. Poirot, to save my son from this marriage.’ She reiterated that
word emphatically, ‘Nothing!’



 She paused, then went on:

 ‘Money is nothing in this matter. Name any fee you like. But the marriage must be stopped. You are the
man to do it.’

 Poirot slowly shook his head.

 ‘It is not a question of money. I can do nothing—for a reason which I will explain to you presently. But
also, I may say, I do not see there is anything to be done. I cannot give you help, Madame la Duchesse.
Will you think me impertinent if I give you advice?’

 ‘What advice?’

 ‘Do not antagonize your son!He is of an age to choose for himself. Because his choice is not your
choice, do not assume that you must be right. If it is a misfortune—then accept misfortune. Be at hand to
aid him when he needs aid. But do not turn him against you.’

 ‘You hardly understand.’

 She rose to her feet. Her lips were trembling.

 ‘But yes, Madame la Duchesse, I understand very well. I comprehend the mother’s heart. No one
comprehends it better than I, Hercule Poirot. And I say to you with authority—be patient. Be patient and
calm, and disguise your feelings. There is yet a chance that the matter may break itself. Opposition will
merely increase your son’s obstinacy.’

 ‘Goodbye, M. Poirot,’ she said coldly. ‘I am disappointed.’

 ‘I regret infinitely, Madame, that I cannot be of service to you. I am in a difficult position. Lady
JaneWilkinson, you see, has already done me the honour to consult me herself.’

 ‘Oh! I see.’ Her voice cut like a knife. ‘You are in the opposite camp. That explains, no doubt, why
Lady JaneWilkinson has not yet been arrested for her husband’s murder.’

 ‘Comment, Madame la Duchesse?’

 ‘I think you heard what I said. Why is she not arrested? She was there that evening. She was seen to
enter the house—to enter his study. No one else went near him and he was found dead? And yet she is
not arrested! Our police force must be corrupt through and through.’

 With shaking hands she arranged the scarf round her neck, then with the slightest of bows, she swept out
of the room.

 ‘Whew!’ I said. ‘What a tartar! I admire her, though, don’t you?’

 ‘Because she wishes to arrange the universe to her manner of thinking?’

 ‘Well, she’s only got her son’s welfare at heart.’

 Poirot nodded his head.



 ‘That is true enough, and yet, Hastings, will it really be such a bad thing for M.le Duc to marry JaneWilkinson
Wilkinson?’

 ‘Why, you don’t think she is really in love with him?’

 ‘Probably not. Almost certainly not. But she is very much in love with his position. She will play her part
carefully. She is an extremely beautiful woman and very ambitious. It is not such a catastrophe. The Duke
might very easily have married a young girl of his own class who would have accepted him for the same
reasons—but no one would have made the song and the dance about that.’

 ‘That is quite true, but—’

 ‘And suppose he marries a girl who loves him passionately, is there such a great advantage in that?
Often I have observed that it is a great misfortune for a man to have a wife who loves him. She creates
the scenes of jealousy, she makes him look ridiculous, she insists on having all his time and attention. Ah!
non , it is not the bed of roses.’

 ‘Poirot,’ I said. ‘You’re an incurable old cynic.’

 ‘Mais non, mais non, I only make the reflections. See you, really, I am on the side of the good mamma.’

 I could not refrain from laughing at hearing the haughty Duchess described in this way.

 Poirot remained quite serious.

 ‘You should not laugh. It is of great importance—all this. I must reflect. I must reflect a great deal.’

 ‘I don’t see what you can do in the matter,’ I said.

 Poirot paid no attention.

 ‘You observed, Hastings, how well-informed the Duchess was? And how vindictive. She knew all the
evidence there was against JaneWilkinson Wilkinson.’

 ‘The case for the prosecution, but not the case for the defence,’ I said, smiling.

 ‘How did she come to know of it?’

 ‘JaneWilkinson told the Duke. The Duke told her,’ I suggested.

 ‘Yes, that is possible. Yet I have—’

 The telephone rang sharply. I answered it.

 My part consisted of saying ‘Yes’ at varying intervals. Finally I put down the receiver and turned
excitedly to Poirot.

 ‘That was Japp. Firstly, you’re “the goods” as usual. Secondly, he’s had a cable from America. Thirdly,
he’s got the taxi-driver. Fourthly, would you like to come round and hear what the taxi-driver says.
Fifthly, you’re “the goods” again, and all along he’s been convinced that you’d hit the nail on the head



when you suggested that there was some man behind all this! I omitted to tell him that we’d just had a
visitor here who says the police force is corrupt.’

 ‘So Japp is convinced at last,’ murmured Poirot. ‘Curious that the Man-in-the-Background theory
should be proved just at the moment when I was inclining to another possible theory.’

 ‘What theory?’

 ‘The theory that the motive for the murder might have nothing to do with Lord Edgware himself. Imagine
someone who hated JaneWilkinson Wilkinson, hated her so much that they would have even had her hanged for
murder.C’est une idée, ça !’

 He sighed—then rousing himself:

 ‘Come, Hastings, let us hear what Japp has to say.’

 Chapter 20

 The Taxi-Driver

 We found Japp interrogating an old man with a ragged moustache and spectacles. He had a hoarse
self-pitying voice.

 ‘Ah! there you are,’ said Japp. ‘Well, things are all plain sailing, I think. This man—his name’s
Jobson—picked up two people in Long Acre on the night of June 29th.’

 ‘That’s right,’ assented Jobson hoarsely. ‘Lovely night it were. Moon and all. The young lady and
gentleman were by the tube station and hailed me.’

 ‘They were in evening dress?’

 ‘Yes, gent in white waistcoat and the young lady all in white with birds embroidered on it. Come out of
the Royal Opera, I guess.’

 ‘What time was this?’

 ‘Some time afore eleven.’

 ‘Well, what next?’

 ‘Told me to go to Regent Gate—they’d tell me which house when they got there. And told me to be
quick, too. People always says that. As though you wanted to loiter. Sooner you get there and get
another fare the better for you. You never think of that. And, mind you, if there’s an accident you’ll get
the blame for dangerous driving!’

 ‘Cut it out,’ said Japp impatiently. ‘There wasn’t an accident this time, was there?’

 ‘N-no,’ agreed the man as though unwilling to abandon his claim to such an occurrence. ‘No, as a
matter of fact there weren’t. Well, I got to Regent Gate—not above seven minutes it didn’t take me, and
there the gentleman rapped on the glass, and I stopped. About at No. 8 that were. Well, the gentleman
and lady got out. The gentleman stopped where he was and told me to do the same. The lady crossed



the road, and began walking back along the houses the other side. The gentleman stayed by the
cab—standing on the sidewalk with his back to me, looking after her. Had his hands in his pockets. It
was about five minutes when I heard him say something—kind of exclamation under his breath and then
off he goes too. I looks after him because I wasn’t going to be bilked. It’s been done afore to me, so I
kept my eye on him. He went up the steps of one of the houses on the other side and went in.’

 ‘Did he push the door open?’

 ‘No, he had a latchkey.’

 ‘What number was the house?’

 ‘It would be 17 or 19, I fancy. Well, it seemed odd to me my being told to stay where I was. So I kept
watching. About five minutes later him and the young lady came out together. They got back into the cab
and told me to drive back to Covent Garden Opera House. They stopped me just before I got there and
paid me. Paid me handsome, I will say. Though I expect I’ve got into trouble over it—seems there’s
nothing but trouble.’

 ‘You’re all right,’ said Japp. ‘Just run your eye over these, will you, and tell me if the young lady is
among them.’

 There were half a dozen photographs all fairly alike as to type. I looked with some interest over his
shoulder.

 ‘That were her,’ said Jobson. He pointed a decisive finger at one of Geraldine Marsh in evening dress.

 ‘Sure?’

 ‘Quite sure. Pale she was and dark.’

 ‘Now the man.’

 Another sheaf of photographs was handed to him.

 He looked at them attentively and then shook his head.

 ‘Well, I couldn’t say—not for sure. Either of these two might be him.’

 The photographs included one of RonaldMarsh , but Jobson had not selected it. Instead he indicated
two other men not unlike Marsh in type.

 Jobson then departed and Japp flung the photographs on the table.

 ‘Good enough. Wish I could have got a clearer identification of his lordship. Of course it’s an old
photograph, taken seven or eight years ago. The only one I could get hold of. Yes, I’d like a clearer
identification, although the case is clear enough. Bang go a couple of alibis. Clever of you to think of it,
M. Poirot.’

 Poirot looked modest.

 ‘When I found that she and her cousin were both at the opera it seemed to me possible that they might



have been together during one of the intervals. Naturally the parties they were with would assume that
they had not left the Opera House. But a half-hour interval gives plenty of time to get to Regent Gate and
back. The moment the new Lord Edgware laid such stress upon his alibi, I was sure something was
wrong with it.’

 ‘You’re a nice suspicious sort of fellow, aren’t you?’ said Japp affectionately. ‘Well, you’re about right.
Can’t be too suspicious in a world like this. His lordship is our man all right. Look at this.’

 He produced a paper.

 ‘Cable from New York. They got in touch with Miss Lucie Adams. The letter was in the mail delivered
to her this morning. She was not willing to give up the original unless absolutely necessary, but she
willingly allowed the officer to take a copy of it and cable it to us. Here it is, and it’s as damning as you
could hope for.’

 Poirot took the cable with great interest. I read it over his shoulder.

 Following is text to Lucie Adams, dated June 29th, 8 Rosedew Mansions, London, S.W.3. Begins,
Dearest little Sister, I’m sorry I wrote such a scrappy bit last week but things were rather busy and there
was a lot to see to. Well, darling, it’s been ever such a success! Notices splendid, box office good, and
everybody most kind. I’ve got some real good friends over here and next year I’m thinking of taking a
theatre for two months. The Russian dancer sketch went very well and the American woman in Paris too,
but the Scenes at a Foreign Hotel are still the favourites, I think. I’m so excited that I hardly know what
I’m writing, and you’ll see why in a minute, but first I must tell you what people have said. Mr
Hergsheimer was ever so kind and he’s going to ask me to lunch to meet Sir Montagu Corner, who
might do great things for me. The other night I met JaneWilkinson Wilkinson and she was ever so sweet about my
show and my take off of her, which brings me round to what I am going to tell you. I don’t really like her
very much because I’ve been hearing a lot about her lately from someone I know and she’s behaved
cruelly, I think, and in a very underhand way—but I won’t go into that now. You know that she really is
Lady JaneWilkinson? I’ve heard a lot about him too lately, and he’s no beauty, I can tell you. He treated his
nephew, the RonaldMarsh I have mentioned to you, in the most shameful way—literally turned him out
of the house and discontinued his allowance. He told me all about it and I felt awfully sorry for him. He
enjoyed my show very much, he said. ‘I believe it would take in Lord Edgware himself. Look here, will
you take something on for a bet?’ I laughed and said, ‘How much?’ Lucie darling, the answer fairly took
my breath away. Ten thousand dollars. Ten thousand dollars, think of it—just to help someone win a silly
bet. ‘Why,’ I said, ‘I’d play a joke on the King in Buckingham Palace and risk lèse majesté for that.’
Well, then, we laid our heads together and got down to details.

 I’ll tell you all about it next week—whether I’m spotted or not. But anyway, Lucie darling, whether I
succeed or fail, I’m to have the ten thousand dollars. Oh! Lucie, little sister, what that’s going to mean to
us. No time for more—just going off to do my ‘hoax’. Lots and lots and lots of love, little sister mine.

 Yours,

 Carlotta.

 Poirot laid down the letter. It had touched him, I could see.

 Japp, however, reacted in quite a different way.

 ‘We’ve got him,’ said Japp exultantly.



 ‘Yes,’ said Poirot.

 His voice sounded strangely flat.

 Japp looked at him curiously.

 ‘What is it, M. Poirot?’

 ‘Nothing,’ said Poirot. ‘It is not, somehow, just as I thought. That is all.’

 He looked acutely unhappy.

 ‘But still it must be so,’ he said as though to himself. ‘Yes, it must be so.’

 ‘Of course it is so. Why, you’ve said so all along!’

 ‘No, no. You misunderstand me.’

 ‘Didn’t you say there was someone back of all this who got the girl into doing it innocently?’

 ‘Yes, yes.’

 ‘Well, what more do you want?’

 Poirot sighed and said nothing.

 ‘You are an odd sort of cove. Nothing ever satisfies you. I say, it was a piece of luck the girl wrote this
letter.’

 Poirot agreed with more vigour than he had yet shown.

 ‘Mais oui, that is what the murderer did not expect. When Miss Adams accepted that ten thousand
dollars she signed her death warrant. The murderer thought he had taken all precautions—and yet in
sheer innocence she outwitted him. The dead speak. Yes, sometimes the dead speak.’

 ‘I never thought she’d done it off her own bat,’ said Japp unblushingly.

 ‘No, no,’ said Poirot absently.

 ‘Well, I must get on with things.’

 ‘You are going to arrest  RonaldMarsh —Lord Edgware, I mean?’

 ‘Why not? The case against him seems proved up to the hilt.’

 ‘True.’

 ‘You seem very despondent about it, M. Poirot. The truth is, you like things to be difficult. Here’s your
own theory proved and even that does not satisfy you. Can you see any flaw in the evidence we’ve got?’



 Poirot shook his head.

 ‘Whether Miss Marsh was accessory or not, I don’t know,’ said Japp. ‘Seems as though she must have
known about it, going there with him from the opera. If she wasn’t, why did he take her? Well, we’ll hear
what they’ve both got to say.’

 ‘May I be present?’

 Poirot spoke almost humbly.

 ‘Certainly you can. I owe the idea to you!’

 He picked up the telegram on the table.

 I drew Poirot aside.

 ‘What is the matter, Poirot?’

 ‘I am very unhappy, Hastings. This seems the plain sailing and the above board. Butthere is something
wrong . Somewhere or other, Hastings, there is a fact that escapes us. It all fits together, it is as I
imagined it, and yet, my friend, there is something wrong.’

 He looked at me piteously.

 I was at a loss what to say.

 Chapter 21

 RonaldMarsh’s Story

 I found it hard to understand Poirot’s attitude. Surely this was what he had predicted all along?

 All the way to Regent Gate, he sat perplexed and frowning, paying no attention to Japp’s
self-congratulations.

 He came out of his reverie at last with a sigh.

 ‘At all events,’ he murmured, ‘we can see what he has to say.’

 ‘Next to nothing if he’s wise,’ said Japp. ‘There’s any amount of men that have hanged themselves by
being too eager to make a statement. Well, no one can say as we don’t warn them! It’s all fair and above
board. And the more guilty they are, the more anxious they are to pipe up and tell you the lies they’ve
thought out to meet the case. They don’t know that you should always submit your lies to a solicitor first.’

 He sighed and said:

 ‘Solicitors and coroners are the worst enemies of the police. Again and again I’ve had a perfectly clear
case messed up by the Coroner fooling about and letting the guilty party get away with it. Lawyers you
can’t object to so much, I suppose. They’re paid for their artfulness and twisting things this way and
that.’



 On arrival at Regent Gate we found that our quarry was at home. The family were still at the luncheon
table. Japp proffered a request to speak to Lord Edgware privately. We were shown into the library.

 In a minute or two the young man came to us. There was an easy smile on his face which changed a little
as he cast a quick glance over us. His lips tightened.

 ‘Hello, Inspector,’ he said. ‘What’s all this about?’

 Japp said his little piece in the classic fashion.

 ‘So that’s it, is it?’ said RonaldMarsh.

 He drew a chair towards him and sat down. He pulled out a cigarette case.

 ‘I think, Inspector, I’d like to make a statement.’

 ‘That’s as you please, my lord.’

 ‘Meaning that it’s damned foolish on my part. All the same, I think I will. “Having no reason to fear the
truth,” as the heroes in books always say.’

 Japp said nothing. His face remained expressionless.

 ‘There’s a nice handy table and chair,’ went on the young man. ‘Your minion can sit down and take it all
down in shorthand.’

 I don’t think that Japp was used to having his arrangements made for him so thoughtfully. Lord
Edgware’s suggestion was adopted.

 ‘To begin with,’ said the young man. ‘Having some grains of intelligence, I strongly suspect that my
beautiful alibi has bust. Gone up in smoke. Exit the useful Dortheimers. Taxi-driver, I suppose?’

 ‘We know all about your movements on that night,’ said Japp woodenly.

 ‘I have the greatest admiration for Scotland Yard. All the same, you know, if I had really been planning
a deed of violence I shouldn’t have hired a taxi and driven straight to the place and kept the fellow
waiting. Have you thought of that? Ah! I see M. Poirot has.’

 ‘It had occurred to me, yes,’ said Poirot.

 ‘Such is not the manner of premeditated crime,’ said RonaldMarsh. ‘Put on a red moustache and horn-rimmed
glasses and drive to the next street and pay the man off. Take the tube—well—well, I won’t go into it all.
My Counsel, at a fee of several thousand guineas, will do it better than I can. Of course, I see the
answer. Crime was a sudden impulse. There was I, waiting in the cab, etc., etc. It occurs to me, ‘Now,
my boy, up and doing.’

 ‘Well, I’m going to tell you the truth. I was in a hole for money. That’s been pretty clear, I think. It was
rather a desperate business. I had to get it by the next day or drop out of things. I tried my uncle. He’d
no love for me, but I thought he might care for the honour of his name. Middle-aged men sometimes do.
My uncle proved to be lamentably modern in his cynical indifference.



 ‘Well—it looked like just having to grin and bear it. I was going to try and have a shot at borrowing
from Dortheimer, but I knew there wasn’t a hope. And marry his daughter I couldn’t. She’s much too
sensible a girl to take me, anyway. Then, by chance, I met my cousin at the opera. I don’t often come
across her, but she was always a decent kid when I lived in the house. I found myself telling her all about
it. She’d heard something from her father anyway. Then she showed her mettle. She suggested I should
take her pearls. They’d belonged to her mother.’

 He paused. There was something like real emotion, I think, in his voice. Or else he suggested it better
than I could have believed possible.

 ‘Well—I accepted the blessed child’s offer. I could raise the money I wanted on them, and I swore I’d
turn to and redeem them even if it meant working to manage it. But the pearls were at home in Regent
Gate. We decided that the best thing to do would be to go and fetch them at once. We jumped in a taxi
and off we went.

 ‘We made the fellow stop on the opposite side of the street in case anyone should hear the taxi draw up
at the door. Geraldine got out and went across the road. She had her latchkey with her. She would go in
quietly, get the pearls and bring them out to me. She didn’t expect to meet anyone except, possibly, a
servant. Miss Carroll, my uncle’s secretary, usually went to bed at half past nine. He, himself, would
probably be in the library.

 ‘So off Dina went. I stood on the pavement smoking a cigarette. Every now and then I looked over
towards the house to see if she was coming. And now I come to that part of the story that you may
believe or not as you like. A man passed me on the sidewalk. I turned to look after him. To my surprise
he went up the steps and let himself in to No. 17. At least I thought it was No. 17, but, of course, I was
some distance away. That surprised me very much for two reasons. One was that the man had let himself
in with a key, and the second was that I thought I recognized in him a certain well-known actor.

 ‘I was so surprised that I determined to look into matters. I happened to have my own key of No. 17 in
my pocket. I’d lost it or thought I’d lost it three years ago, had come across it unexpectedly a day or two
ago and had been meaning to give it back to my uncle this morning. However, in the heat of our
discussion, it had slipped my memory. I had transferred it with the other contents of my pockets when I
changed.

 ‘Telling the taxi man to wait, I strode hurriedly along the pavement, crossed the road, went up the steps
of No. 17, and opened the door with my key. The hall was empty. There was no sign of any visitor
having just entered. I stood for a minute looking about me. Then I went towards the library door.
Perhaps the man was in with my uncle. If so, I should hear the murmur of voices. I stood outside the
library door, but I heard nothing.

 ‘I suddenly felt I had made the most abject fool of myself. Of course the man must have gone into some
other house—the house beyond, probably. Regent Gate is rather dimly lighted at night. I felt an absolute
idiot. What on earth had possessed me to follow the fellow, I could not think. It had landed me here, and
a pretty fool I should look if my uncle were to come suddenly out of the library and find me. I should get
Geraldine into trouble and altogether the fat would be in the fire. All because something in the man’s
manner had made me imagine that he was doing something that he didn’t want known. Luckily no one
caught me. I must get out of it as soon as I could.

 ‘I tiptoed back towards the front door and at the same moment Geraldine came down the stairs with the
pearls in her hand.



 ‘She was very startled at seeing me, of course. I got her out of the house, and then explained.’

 He paused.

 ‘We hurried back to the opera. Got there just as the curtain was going up. No one suspected that we’d
left it. It was a hot night and several people went outside to get a breath of air.’

 He paused.

 ‘I know what you’ll say: Why didn’t I tell you this right away? And now I put it to you: Would you, with
a motive for murder sticking out a yard, admit light-heartedly that you’d actually been at the place the
murder was committed on the night in question?

 ‘Frankly, I funked it! Even if we were believed, it was going to be a lot of worry for me and for
Geraldine. We’d nothing to do with the murder, we’d seen nothing, we’d heard nothing. Obviously, I
thought, Aunt JaneWilkinson had done it. Well, why bring myself in? I told you about the quarrel and my lack of
money because I knew you’d ferret it out, and if I’d tried to conceal all that you’d be much more
suspicious and you’d probably examine that alibi much more closely. As it was, I thought that if I bucked
enough about it it would almost hypnotize you into thinking it all right. The Dortheimers were, I know,
honestly convinced that I’d been at Covent Garden all the time. That I spent one interval with my cousin
wouldn’t strike them as suspicious. And she could always say she’d been with me there and that we
hadn’t left the place.’

 ‘Miss Marsh agreed to this—concealment?’

 ‘Yes. Soon as I got the news, I got on to her and cautioned her for her life not to say anything about her
excursion here last night. She’d been with me and I’d been with her during the last interval at Covent
Garden. We’d talked in the street a little, that was all. She understood and she quite agreed.’

 He paused.

 ‘I know it looks bad—coming out with this afterwards. But the story’s true enough. I can give you the
name and address of the man who let me have the cash on Geraldine’s pearls this morning. And if you
ask her, she’ll confirm every word I’ve told you.’

 He sat back in his chair and looked at Japp.

 Japp continued to look expressionless.

 ‘You say you thought JaneWilkinson Wilkinson had committed the murder, Lord Edgware?’ he said.

 ‘Well, wouldn’t you have thought so? After the butler’s story?’

 ‘What about your wager with Miss Adams?’

 ‘Wager with Miss Adams? With Carlotta Adams, do you mean? What has she got to do with it?’

 ‘Do you deny that you offered her the sum of ten thousand dollars to impersonate Miss JaneWilkinson Wilkinson
at the house that night?’

 RonaldMarsh stared.



 ‘Offered her ten thousand dollars? Nonsense. Someone’s been pulling your leg. I haven’t got ten
thousand dollars to offer. You’ve got hold of a mare’s nest. Doesshe say so? Oh! Dash it all—I forgot,
she’s dead, isn’t she?’

 ‘Yes,’ said Poirot quietly. ‘She is dead.’

 RonaldMarsh turned his eyes from one to the other of us. He had been debonair before. Now his face had
whitened. His eyes looked frightened.

 ‘I don’t understand all this,’ he said. ‘It’s true what I told you. I suppose you don’t believe me—any of
you.’

 And then, to my amazement, Poirot stepped forward.

 ‘Yes,’ he said. ‘I believe you.’

 Chapter 22

 Strange Behaviour
of Hercule Poirot

 We were in our rooms.

 ‘What on earth—’ I began.

 Poirot stopped me with a gesture more extravagant than any gesture I had ever seen him make. Both
arms whirled in the air.

 ‘I implore you, Hastings! Not now. Not now.’

 And upon that he seized his hat, clapped it on his head as though he had never heard of order and
method, and rushed headlong from the room. He had not returned when, about an hour later, Japp
appeared.

 ‘Little man gone out?’ he inquired.

 I nodded.

 Japp sank into a seat. He dabbed his forehead with a handkerchief. The day was warm.

 ‘What the devil took him?’ he inquired. ‘I can tell you, Captain Hastings, you could have knocked me
down with a feather when he stepped up to the man and said: “I believe you.” For all the world as though
he were acting in a romantic melodrama. It beats me.’

 It beat me also, and I said so.

 ‘And then he marches out of the house,’ said Japp.

 ‘What did he say about it to you?’



 ‘Nothing,’ I replied.

 ‘Nothing at all?’

 ‘Absolutely nothing. When I was going to speak to him he waved me aside. I thought it best to leave him
alone. When we got back here I started to question him. He waved his arms, seized his hat and rushed
out again.’

 We looked at each other. Japp tapped his forehead significantly.

 ‘Must be,’ he said.

 For once I was disposed to agree. Japp had often suggested before that Poirot was what he called
‘touched’. In those cases he had simply not understood what Poirot was driving at. Here, I was forced to
confess, I could not understand Poirot’s attitude. If not touched, he was, at any rate, suspiciously
changeable. Here was his own private theory triumphantly confirmed and straight away he went back on
it.

 It was enough to dismay and distress his warmest supporters. I shook my head in a discouraged fashion.

 ‘He’s always been what I call peculiar,’ said Japp. ‘Got his own particular angle of looking at
things—and a very queer one it is. He’s a kind of genius, I admit that. But they always say that geniuses
are very near the border line and liable to slip over any minute. He’s always been fond of having things
difficult. A straightforward case is never good enough for him. No, it’s got to be tortuous. He’s got away
from real life. He plays a game of his own. It’s like an old lady playing at patience. If it doesn’t come out,
she cheats. Well, it’s the other way round with him. If it’s coming out too easily, he cheats to make it
more difficult! That’s the way I look at it.’

 I found it difficult to answer him. I, also, found Poirot’s behaviour unaccountable. And since I was very
attached to my strange little friend, it worried me more than I cared to express.

 In the middle of a gloomy silence, Poirot walked into the room.

 He was, I was thankful to see, quite calm now.

 Very carefully he removed his hat, placed it with his stick on the table, and sat down in his accustomed
chair.

 ‘So you are here, my good Japp. I am glad. It was on my mind that I must see you as soon as possible.’

 Japp looked at him without replying. He saw that this was only the beginning. He waited for Poirot to
explain himself.

 This my friend did, speaking slowly and carefully.

 ‘Ecoutez, Japp. We are wrong. We are all wrong. It is grievous to admit it, but we have made a
mistake.’

 ‘That’s all right,’ said Japp confidently.

 ‘But it is not all right. It is deplorable. It grieves me to the heart.’



 ‘You needn’t be grieved about that young man. He richly deserves all he gets.’

 ‘It is not he I am grieving about—it is you.’

 ‘Me? You needn’t worry about me.’

 ‘But I do. See you, who was it set you on this course? It was Hercule Poirot.Mais oui , I set you on the
trail. I direct your attention to Carlotta Adams, I mention to you the matter of the letter to America. Every
step of the way it is I who point it!’

 ‘I was bound to get there anyway,’ said Japp coldly. ‘You got a bit ahead of me, that’s all.’

 ‘Cela ce peut. But it does not console me. If harm—if loss of prestige comes to you through listening to
my little ideas—I shall blame myself bitterly.’

 Japp merely looked amused. I think he credited Poirot with motives that were none too pure. He fancied
that Poirot grudged him the credit resulting from the successful elucidation of the affair.

 ‘That’s all right,’ he said. ‘I shan’t forget to let it be known that I owe something to you over this
business.’

 He winked at me.

 ‘Oh! it is not that at all.’ Poirot clicked his tongue with impatience. ‘I want no credit. And what is more,
I tell you there will be no credit. It is a fiasco that you prepare for yourself, and I, Hercule Poirot, am the
cause.’

 Suddenly, at Poirot’s expression of extreme melancholy, Japp shouted with laughter. Poirot looked
affronted.

 ‘Sorry, M. Poirot.’ He wiped his eyes. ‘But you did look for all the world like a dying duck in a thunder
storm. Now look here, let’s forget all this. I’m willing to shoulder the credit or the blame of this affair. It
will make a big noise—you’re right there. Well, I’m going all out to get a conviction. It may be that a
clever Counsel will get his lordship off—you never know with a jury. But even so, it won’t do me any
harm. It will be known that we caught the right man even if we couldn’t get a conviction. And if, by any
chance, the third housemaid has hysterics and owns up she did it—well, I’ll take my medicine and I
won’t complain you led me up the garden. That’s fair enough.’

 Poirot gazed at him mildly and sadly.

 ‘You have the confidence—always the confidence! You never stop and say to yourself—can it be so?
You never doubt—or wonder. You never think: This is too easy!’

 ‘You bet your life I don’t. And that’s just where, if you’ll excuse me saying so, you go off the rails every
time. Why shouldn’t a thing be easy? What’s the harm in a thing being easy?’

 Poirot looked at him, sighed, half threw up his arms, then shook his head.

 ‘C’est fini!I will say no more.’



 ‘Splendid,’ said Japp heartily. ‘Now let’s get down to brass tacks. You’d like to hear what I’ve been
doing?’

 ‘Assuredly.’

 ‘Well, I saw the Honourable Geraldine, and her story tallied exactly with his lordship’s. They may both
be in it together, but I think not. It’s my opinion he bluffed her—she’s three parts sweet on him anyway.
Took on terribly when she found he was arrested.’

 ‘Did she now? And the secretary—Miss Carroll?’

 ‘Wasn’t too surprised, I fancy. However, that’s only my idea.’

 ‘What about the pearls?’ I asked. ‘Was that part of the story true?’

 ‘Absolutely. He raised the money on them early the following morning. But I don’t think that touches the
main argument. As I see it, the plan came into his head when he came across his cousin at the opera. It
came to him in a flash. He was desperate—here was a way out. I fancy he’d been meditating something
of the kind—that’s why he had the key with him. I don’t believe that story of suddenly coming across it.
Well, as he talks to his cousin, he sees that by involving her he gains additional security for himself. He
plays on her feelings, hints at the pearls, she plays up, and off they go. As soon as she’s in the house he
follows her in and goes along to the library. Maybe his lordship has dozed off in his chair. Anyway, in
two seconds he’s done the trick and he’s out again. I don’t fancy he meant the girl to catch him in the
house. He counted on being found pacing up and down near the taxi. And I don’t think the taxi-man was
meant to see him go in. The impression was to be that he was walking up and down smoking whilst he
waited for the girl. The taxi was facing the opposite direction, remember.

 ‘Of course, the next morning, he has to pledge the pearls. He must still seem to be in need of the money.
Then, when he hears of the crime, he frightens the girl into concealing their visit to the house. They will
say that they spent that interval together at the Opera House.’

 ‘Then why did they not do so?’ asked Poirot sharply.

 Japp shrugged his shoulders.

 ‘Changed his mind. Or judged that she wouldn’t be able to go through with it. She’s a nervous type.’

 ‘Yes,’ said Poirot meditatively. ‘She is a nervous type.’

 After a minute or two, he said:

 ‘It does not strike you that it would have been easier and simpler for RonaldMarsh to have left the
opera during the interval by himself. To have gone in quietly with his key, killed his uncle, and returned to
the opera—instead of having a taxi outside and a nervous girl coming down the stairs any minute who
might lose her head and give him away.’

 Japp grinned.

 ‘That’s what you and I would have done. But then we’re a shade brighter than RonaldMarsh.’

 ‘I am not so sure. He strikes me as intelligent.’



 ‘But not so intelligent as M. Hercule Poirot! Come now, I’m sure of that!’ Japp laughed.

 Poirot looked at him coldly.

 ‘If he isn’t guilty why did he persuade the Adams girl to take on that stunt?’ went on Japp. ‘There can
be only one reason for that stunt—to protect the real criminal.’

 ‘There I am of accord with you absolutely.’

 ‘Well, I’m glad we agree about something.’

 ‘It might be he who actually spoke to Miss Adams,’ mused Poirot. ‘Whilst really—no, that is an
imbecility.’

 Then, looking suddenly at Japp, he rapped out a quick question.

 ‘What is your theory as to her death?’

 Japp cleared his throat.

 ‘I’m inclined to believe—accident. A convenient accident, I admit. I can’t see that he could have had
anything to do with it. His alibi is straight enough after the opera. He was at Sobranis with the
Dortheimers till after one o’clock. Long before that she was in bed and asleep. No, I think that was an
instance of the infernal luck criminals sometimes have. Otherwise, if that accident hadn’t happened, I
think he had his plans for dealing with her. First, he’d put the fear of the Lord into her—tell her she’d be
arrested for murder if she confessed the truth. And then he’d square her with a fresh lot of money.’

 ‘Does it strike you—’ Poirot stared straight in front of him. ‘Does it strike you that Miss Adams would
let another woman be hanged when she herself held evidence that would acquit her?’

 ‘JaneWilkinson Wilkinson wouldn’t have been hanged. The Montagu Corner party evidence was too strong for
that.’

 ‘But the murderer did not know that. He would have had to count on JaneWilkinson Wilkinson being hanged and
Carlotta Adams keeping silence.’

 ‘You love talking, don’t you, M. Poirot? And you’re positively convinced now that RonaldMarsh is a
white-headed boy who can do no wrong. Do you believe that story of his about seeing a man sneak
surreptitiously into the house?’

 Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

 ‘Do you know who he says he thought it was?’

 ‘I could guess, perhaps.’

 ‘He says he thought it was the film star, Bryan Martin. What do you think of that? A man who’d never
even met Lord Edgware.’

 ‘Then it would certainly be curious if one saw such a man entering that house with a key.’



 ‘Chah!’ said Japp. A rich noise expressive of contempt. ‘And now I suppose it will surprise you to hear
that Mr Bryan Martin wasn’t in London that night. He took a young lady to dine down at Molesey. They
didn’t get back to London till midnight.’

 ‘Ah!’ said Poirot mildly. ‘No, I am not surprised. Was the young lady also a member of the profession?’

 ‘No. Girl who keeps a hat shop. As a matter of fact, it was Miss Adams’ friend, Miss Driver. I think
you’ll agree her testimony is past suspicion.’

 ‘I am not disputing it, my friend.’

 ‘In fact, you’re done down and you know it, old boy,’ said Japp, laughing. ‘Cock and bull story
trumped up on the moment, that’s what it was. Nobody entered No. 17…and nobody entered either of
the houses either side—so what does that show? That his lordship’s a liar.’

 Poirot shook his head sadly.

 Japp rose to his feet—his spirits restored.

 ‘Come, now, we’re right, you know.’

 ‘Who was D. Paris, November?’

 Japp shrugged his shoulders.

 ‘Ancient history, I imagine. Can’t a girl have a souvenir six months ago without its having something to
do with this crime? We must have a sense of proportion.’

 ‘Six months ago,’ murmured Poirot, a sudden light in his eyes. ‘Dieu, que je suis bête!’

 ‘What’s he saying?’ inquired Japp of me.

 ‘Listen.’ Poirot rose and tapped Japp on the chest.

 ‘Why does Miss Adams’ maid not recognize that box? Why does Miss Driver not recognize it?’

 ‘What do you mean?’

 ‘Because the box wasnew ! It had only just been given to her. Paris, November—that is all very
well—doubtless that is the date of which the box is to be asouvenir . But it was given to hernow , notthen
. It has just been bought! Only just been bought! Investigate that, I implore you, my good Japp. It is a
chance, decidedly a chance. It was bought not here, but abroad. Probably Paris. If it had been bought
here, some jeweller would have come forward. It has been photographed and described in the papers.
Yes, yes, Paris. Possibly some other foreign town, but I think Paris. Find out, I implore you. Make the
inquiries. I want—I so badly want—to know who is this mysterious D.’

 ‘It will do no harm,’ said Japp good-naturedly. ‘Can’t say I’m very excited about it myself. But I’ll do
what I can. The more we know the better.’

 Nodding cheerfully to us he departed.



 Chapter 23

 The Letter

 ‘And now,’ said Poirot, ‘we will go out to lunch.’

 He put his hand through my arm. He was smiling at me.

 ‘I have hope,’ he explained.

 I was glad to see him restored to his old self, though I was none the less convinced myself of young
RonaldMarsh’s guilt. I fancied that Poirot himself had perhaps come round to this view, convinced by Japp’s
arguments. The search for the purchaser of the box was, perhaps, a last sally to save his face.

 We went amicably to lunch together.

 Somewhat to my amusement at a table the other side of the room, I saw Bryan Martin and Jenny Driver
lunching together. Remembering what Japp had said, I suspected a possible romance.

 They saw us and Jenny waved a hand.

 When we were sipping coffee, Jenny left her escort and came over to our table. She looked as vivid and
dynamic as ever.

 ‘May I sit and talk to you a minute, M. Poirot?’

 ‘Assuredly, Mademoiselle. I am charmed to see you. Will not M. Martin join us also?’

 ‘I told him not to. You see, I wanted to talk to you about Carlotta.’

 ‘Yes, Mademoiselle?’

 ‘You wanted to get a line on to some man friend of hers. Isn’t that so?’

 ‘Yes, yes.’

 ‘Well, I’ve been thinking and thinking. Sometimes you can’t get at things straight away. To get them
clear you’ve got to think back—remember a lot of little words and phrases that perhaps you didn’t pay
attention to at the time. Well, that’s what I’ve been doing. Thinking and thinking—and remembering just
what she said. And I’ve come to a certain conclusion.’

 ‘Yes, Mademoiselle?’

 ‘I think the man that she cared about—or was beginning to care about—was RonaldMarsh—you
know, the one who has just succeeded to the title.’

 ‘What makes you think it was he, Mademoiselle?’

 ‘Well, for one thing, Carlotta was speaking in a general sort of way one day. About a man having hard
luck, and how it might affect character. That a man might be a decent sort really and yet go down the hill.



More sinned against then sinning—you know the idea. The first thing a woman kids herself with when
she’s getting soft about a man. I’ve heard the old wheeze so often! Carlotta had plenty of sense, yet here
she was coming out with this stuff just like a complete ass who knew nothing of life. “Hello,” I said to
myself. “Something’s up.” She didn’t mention a name—it was all general. But almost immediately after
that she began to speak of RonaldMarsh and that she thought he’d been badly treated. She was very
impersonal and offhand about it. I didn’t connect the two things at the time. But now—I wonder. It
seems to me that it was RonaldMarsh she meant. What do you think, M. Poirot?’

 Her face looked earnestly up into his.

 ‘I think, Mademoiselle, that you have perhaps given me some very valuable information.’

 ‘Good.’ Jenny clapped her hands.

 Poirot looked kindly at her.

 ‘Perhaps you have not heard—the gentleman of whom you speak, RonaldMarsh —Lord
Edgware—has just been arrested.’

 ‘Oh!’ Her mouth flew open in surprise. ‘Then my bit of thinking comes rather late in the day.’

 ‘It is never too late,’ said Poirot. ‘Not with me, you understand. Thank you, Mademoiselle.’

 She left us to return to Bryan Martin.

 ‘There, Poirot,’ I said. ‘Surely that shakes your belief.’

 ‘No, Hastings. On the contrary—it strengthens it.’

 Despite that valiant assertion I believed myself that secretly he had weakened.

 During the days that followed he never once mentioned the Edgware case. If I spoke of it, he answered
monosyllabically and without interest. In other words, he had washed his hands of it. Whatever he had
had lingering in his fantastic brain, he had now been forced to admit that it had not materialized—that his
first conception of the case had been the true one and that RonaldMarsh was only too truly accused of
the crime. Only, being Poirot, he could not admit openly that such was the case! Therefore he pretended
to have lost interest.

 Such, as I say, was my interpretation of his attitude. It seemed borne out by the facts. He took no
faintest interest in the police court proceedings, which in any case were purely formal. He busied himself
with other cases and, as I say, he displayed no interest when the subject was mentioned.

 It was nearly a fortnight later than the events mentioned in my last chapter when I came to realize that my
interpretation of his attitude was entirely wrong.

 It was breakfast time. The usual heavy pile of letters lay by Poirot’s plate. He sorted through them with
nimble fingers. Then he uttered a quick exclamation of pleasure and picked up a letter with an American
stamp on it.

 He opened it with his little letter-opener. I looked on with interest since he seemed so moved to pleasure
about it. There was a letter and a fairly thick enclosure.



 Poirot read the former through twice, then he looked up.

 ‘Would you like to see this, Hastings?’

 I took it from him. It ran as follows:

 Dear M. Poirot,—I was much touched by your kind—your very kind letter. I have been feeling so
bewildered by everything. Apart from my terrible grief, I have been so affronted by the things that seem
to have been hinted about Carlotta—the dearest, sweetest sister that a girl ever had. No, M. Poirot, she
didnottake drugs. I’m sure of it. She had a horror of that kind of thing. I’ve often heard her say so. If she
played a part in that poor man’s death, it was an entirely innocent one—but of course her letter to me
proves that. I am sending you the actual letter itself since you ask me to do so. I hate parting with the last
letter she ever wrote, but I know you will take care of it and let me have it back, and if it helps you to
clear up some of the mystery about her death, as you say it may do—why, then, of course it must go to
you.

 You ask whether Carlotta mentioned any friend specially in her letters. She mentioned a great many
people, of course, but nobody in a very outstanding way. Bryan Martin whom we used to know years
ago, a girl called Jenny Driver, and a RonaldMarsh were, I think, the ones she saw most of.

 I wish I could think of something to help you. You write so kindly and with such understanding, and you
seem to realize what Carlotta and I were to each other.

 Gratefully yours,

 Lucie Adams

 P.S. An officer has just been here for the letter. I told him that I had already mailed it to you. This, of
course, was not true, but I felt somehow or other that it was important you should see it first. It seems
Scotland Yard need it as evidence, against the murderer. You will take it to them. But, oh! please be sure
they let you have it back again some day. You see, it is Carlotta’s last words to me.

 ‘So you wrote yourself to her,’ I remarked as I laid the letter down. ‘Why did you do that, Poirot? And
why did you ask for the original of Carlotta Adams’ letter?’

 He was bending over the enclosed sheets of the letter I mentioned.

 ‘In verity I could not say, Hastings—unless it is that I hoped against hope that the original letter might in
some way explain the inexplicable.’

 ‘I don’t see how you can get away from the text of that letter. Carlotta Adams gave it herself to the maid
to post. There was no hocus pocus about it. And certainly it reads as a perfectly genuine ordinary
epistle.’

 Poirot sighed.

 ‘I know. I know. And that is what makes it so difficult. Because, Hastings, as it stands, that letter is
impossible .’

 ‘Nonsense.’



 ‘Si, si, it is so. See you, as I have reasoned it out, certain thingsmust be—they follow each other with
method and order in an understandable fashion. But then comes this letter. It does not accord. Who,
then, is wrong? Hercule Poirot or the letter?’

 ‘You don’t think it possible that it could be Hercule Poirot?’ I suggested as delicately as I was able.

 Poirot threw me a glance of reproof.

 ‘There are times when I have been in error—but this is not one of them. Clearly then, since the letter
seems impossible, itis impossible. There is some fact about the letter which escapes us. I seek to discover
what that fact is.’

 And thereupon he resumed his study of the letter in question, using a small pocket microscope.

 As he finished perusing each page, he passed it across to me. I, certainly, could find nothing amiss. It
was written in a firm fairly legible handwriting and it was word for word as it had been telegraphed
across.

 Poirot sighed deeply.

 ‘There is no forgery of any kind here—no, it is all written in the same hand. And yet, since, as I say, it is
impossible—’

 He broke off. With an impatient gesture he demanded the sheets from me. I passed them over, and once
again he went slowly through them.

 Suddenly he uttered a cry.

 I had left the breakfast table and was standing looking out of the window. At this sound, I turned
sharply.

 Poirot was literally quivering with excitement. His eyes were green like a cat’s. His pointing finger
trembled.

 ‘See you, Hastings? Look here—quickly—come and look.’

 I ran to his side. Spread out before him was one of the middle sheets of the letter. I could see nothing
unusual about it.



 ‘See you not? All these other sheets they have the clean edge—they are single sheets. But this
one—see—one side of it is ragged—it has been torn. Now do you see what I mean?This letter was a
double sheet , and so, you comprehend,one page of the letter is missing .’

 I stared stupidly, no doubt.

 ‘But how can it be. It makes sense.’

 ‘Yes, yes, it makes sense. That is where the cleverness of the idea comes in. Read—and you will see.’

 I think I cannot do better than to apprehend a facsimile of the page in question.

 ‘You see it now?’ said Poirot. ‘The letter breaks off where she is talking of RonaldMarsh. She is sorry
for him, and then she says: “He enjoyed my show very much.” Then on the new sheet she goes on: “he
said…” But,mon ami , apage is missing . The “he” of the new page may not be the “He” of the old page.
In fact it is not the “He” of the old page . It is another man altogether who proposed that hoax. Observe,
nowhere after that is the name mentioned. Ah!C’est épatant! Somehow or other our murderer gets hold
of this letter. It gives him away. No doubt he thinks to suppress it altogether, and then—reading it
over—he sees another way of dealing with it. Remove one page, and the letter is capable of being
twisted into a damning accusation of another man—a man too who has a motive for Lord Edgware’s
death. Ah! it was a gift! The money for theconfiture as you say! He tears the sheet off and replaces the
letter.’

 I looked at Poirot in some admiration. I was not perfectly convinced of the truth of his theory. It seemed
to be highly possible that Carlotta had used an odd half sheet that was already torn. But Poirot was so
transfigured with joy that I simply had not the heart to suggest this prosaic possibility. After all, hemight
be right.

 I did, however, venture to point out one or two difficulties in the way of his theory.



 ‘But how did the man, whoever he was, get hold of the letter? Miss Adams took it straight from her
handbag and gave it herself to the maid to post. The maid told us so.’

 ‘Therefore we must assume one of two things. Either the maid was lying, or else, during that evening,
Carlotta Adams met the murderer.’

 I nodded.

 ‘It seems to me that that last possibility is the most likely one. We still do not know where Carlotta
Adams was between the time she left the flat and nine o’clock when she left her suitcase at Euston
station. During that time, I believe myself that she met the murderer in some appointed spot—they
probably had some food together. He gave her some last instructions. What happened exactly in regard
to the letter we do not know. One can make a guess. She may have been carrying it in her hand meaning
to post it. She may have laid it down on the table in the restaurant. He sees the address and scents a
possible danger. He may have picked it up adroitly, made an excuse for leaving the table, opened it, read
it, torn out the sheet, and then either replaced it on the table, or perhaps given it to her as she left, telling
her that she had dropped it without noticing. The exact way of it was not important—but two things do
seem clear. That Carlotta Adams met the murderer that evening either before the murder of Lord
Edgware, or afterwards (there was time after she left the Corner House for a brief interview). I have a
fancy, though there I am perhaps wrong, that it was the murderer who gave her the gold box—it was
possibly a sentimental memento of their first meeting.If so, the murderer is D .’

 ‘I don’t see the point of the gold box.’

 ‘Listen, Hastings, Carlotta Adams was not addicted to veronal. Lucie Adams says so, and I, too,
believe it to be true. She was a clear-eyed healthy girl with no predilection for such things. None of her
friends nor her maid recognized the box. Why, then, was it found in her possession after she died? To
create the impression that shedid take veronal and that she had taken it for a considerable time—that is
to say at least six months. Let us say that she met the murderer after the murder if only for a few minutes.
They had a drink together, Hastings, to celebrate the success of their plan. And in the girl’s drink he put
sufficient veronal to ensure that there should be no waking for her on the following morning.’

 ‘Horrible,’ I said with a shudder.

 ‘Yes, it was not pretty,’ said Poirot dryly.

 ‘Are you going to tell Japp all this?’ I asked after a minute or two.

 ‘Not at the moment. What have I got to tell? He would say, the excellent Japp, “another nest of the
mare! The girl wrote on an odd sheet of paper!”C’est tout .’

 I looked guiltily at the ground.

 ‘What can I say to that? Nothing. It is a thing that might have happened. I only know it did not happen
becauseit is necessary that it should not have happened .’

 He paused. A dreamy expression stole across his face.

 ‘Figure to yourself, Hastings, if only that man had had the order and the method, he would have cut that
sheet not torn it. And we should have noticed nothing. But nothing!’



 ‘So we deduce that he is a man of careless habits,’ I said, smiling.

 ‘No, no. He might have been in a hurry. You observe it is very carelessly torn. Oh! assuredly he was
pressed for time.’

 He paused and then said:

 ‘One thing you do remark, I hope. This man—this D—he must have had a very good alibi for that
evening.’

 ‘I can’t see how he could have had any alibi at all if he spent his time first at Regent Gate doing a murder
and then with Carlotta Adams.’

 ‘Precisely,’ said Poirot. ‘That is what I mean. He is badly in need of an alibi, so no doubt he prepared
one. Another point: Does his name really begin with D? Or does D stand for some nickname by which he
was known to her?’

 He paused and then said softly:

 ‘A man whose initial or whose nickname is D. We have got to find him, Hastings. Yes, we have got to
find him.’

 Chapter 24

 News from Paris

 On the following day we had an unexpected visit.

 Geraldine Marsh was announced.

 I felt sorry for her as Poirot greeted her and set a chair for her. Her large dark eyes seemed wider and
darker than ever. There were black circles round them as though she had not slept. Her face looked
extraordinarily haggard and weary for one so young—little more, really, than a child.

 ‘I have come to see you, M. Poirot, because I don’t know how to go on any longer. I am so terribly
worried and upset.’

 ‘Yes, Mademoiselle?’

 His manner was gravely sympathetic.

 ‘RonaldMarsh told me what you said to him that day. I mean that dreadful day when he was arrested.’ She
shivered. ‘He told me that you came up to him suddenly, just when he had said that he supposed no one
would believe him, and that you said to him: “I believe you.” Is that true, M. Poirot?’

 ‘It is true, Mademoiselle, that is what I said.’

 ‘I know, but I meant not was it true you said it, but were the words really true. I mean,did you believe
his story?’



 Terribly anxious she looked, leaning forward there, her hands clasped together.

 ‘The words were true, Mademoiselle,’ said Poirot quietly. ‘I do not believe your cousin killed Lord
Edgware.’

 ‘Oh!’ The colour came into her face, her eyes opened big and wide. ‘Then you must think—that
someone else did it!’

 ‘Evidemment, Mademoiselle.’ He smiled.

 ‘I’m stupid. I say things badly. What I mean is—you think you know who that somebody is?’

 She leaned forward eagerly.

 ‘I have my little ideas, naturally—my suspicions, shall we say?’

 ‘Won’t you tell me? Please—please.’

 Poirot shook his head.

 ‘It would be—perhaps—unfair.’

 ‘Then youhave got a definite suspicion of somebody?’

 Poirot merely shook his head non-committally.

 ‘If only I knew a little more,’ pleaded the girl. ‘It would make it so much easier for me. And I might
perhaps be able to help you. Yes, really I might be able to help you.’

 Her pleading was very disarming, but Poirot continued to shake his head.

 ‘The Duchess of Merton is still convinced it was my stepmother,’ said the girl thoughtfully. She gave a
slight questioning glance at Poirot.

 He showed no reaction.

 ‘But I hardly see how that can be.’

 ‘What is your opinion of her? Of your stepmother?’

 ‘Well—I hardly know her. I was at school in Paris when my father married her. When I came home, she
was quite kind. I mean, she just didn’t notice I was there. I thought her very empty-headed and—well,
mercenary.’

 Poirot nodded.

 ‘You spoke of the Duchess of Merton. You have seen much of her?’

 ‘Yes. She has been very kind to me. I have been with her a great deal during the last fortnight. It has
been terrible—with all the talk, and the reporters, and RonaldMarsh in prison and everything.’ She shivered. ‘I
feel I have no real friends. But the Duchess has been wonderful, and he has been nice too—her son, I



mean.’

 ‘You like him?’

 ‘He is shy, I think. Stiff and rather difficult to get on with. But his mother talks a lot about him, so that I
feel I know him better than I really do.’

 ‘I see. Tell me, Mademoiselle, you are fond of your cousin?’

 ‘Of RonaldMarsh? Of course. He—I haven’t seen much of him the last two years—but before that he used to
live in the house. I—I always thought he was wonderful. Always joking and thinking up mad things to do.
Oh! in that gloomy house of ours it made all the difference.’

 Poirot nodded sympathetically, but he went on to make a remark that shocked me in its crudity.

 ‘You do not want to see him—hanged, then?’

 ‘No, no.’ The girl shivered violently. ‘Not that. Oh! if only it were her—my stepmother. It must be her.
The Duchess says it must.’

 ‘Ah!’ said Poirot. ‘If only RonaldMarsh had stayed in the taxi—eh?’

 ‘Yes—at least, what do you mean?’ Her brow wrinkled. ‘I don’t understand.’

 ‘If he had not followed that man into the house. Did you hear anyone come in, by the way?’

 ‘No, I didn’t hear anything.’

 ‘What did you do when you came into the house?’

 ‘I ran straight upstairs—to fetch the pearls, you know.’

 ‘Of course. It took you some time to fetch them.’

 ‘Yes. I couldn’t find the key to my jewel-case all at once.’

 ‘So often is that the case. The more in haste, the less the speed. It was some time before you came
down, and then—you found your cousin in the hall?’

 ‘Yes, coming from the library.’ She swallowed.

 ‘I comprehend. It gave you quite a turn.’

 ‘Yes, it did.’ She looked grateful for his sympathetic tone. ‘It startled me, you see.’

 ‘Quite, quite.’

 ‘Ronnie just said: “Hello, Dina, got them?” from behind me—and it made me jump.’

 ‘Yes,’ said Poirot gently. ‘As I said before it is a pity he did not stay outside. Then the taxi-driver would
have been able to swear he never entered the house.’



 She nodded. Her tears began to fall, splashing unheeded on her lap. She got up. Poirot took her hand.

 ‘You want me to save him for you—is that it?’

 ‘Yes, yes—oh! please, yes. You don’t know…’

 She stood there striving to control herself, clenching her hands.

 ‘Life has not been easy for you, Mademoiselle,’ said Poirot gently. ‘I appreciate that. No, it has not
been easy. Hastings, will you get Mademoiselle a taxi?’

 I went down with the girl and saw her into the taxi. She had composed herself by now and thanked me
very prettily.

 I found Poirot walking up and down the room, his brows knitted in thought. He looked unhappy.

 I was glad when the telephone bell rang to distract him.

 ‘Who is that? Oh, it is Japp.Bonjour, mon ami .’

 ‘What’s he got to say?’ I asked, drawing nearer the telephone.

 Finally, after various ejaculations, Poirot spoke.

 ‘Yes, and who called for it? Do they know?’

 Whatever the answer, it was not what he expected. His face dropped ludicrously.

 ‘Are you sure?’

 ‘………’

 ‘No, it is a little upsetting, that is all.’

 ‘………’

 ‘Yes, I must rearrange my ideas.’

 ‘………’

 ‘Comment?’

 ‘………’

 ‘All the same, I was right about it. Yes, a detail, as you say.’

 ‘………’

 ‘No, I am still of the same opinion. I would pray of you to make still further inquiries of the restaurants in
the neighbourhood of Regent Gate and Euston, Tottenham Court Road and perhaps Oxford Street.’



 ‘………’

 ‘Yes, a woman and a man. And also in the neighbourhood of the Strand just before midnight.Comment
?’

 ‘………’

 ‘But, yes, I know that RonaldMarsh was with the Dortheimers. But there are other people in the world
besides RonaldMarsh.’

 ‘………’

 ‘To say I have the head of a pig is not pretty.Tout de même , oblige me in this matter, I pray of you.’

 ‘………’

 He replaced the receiver.

 ‘Well?’ I asked impatiently.

 ‘Is it well? I wonder. Hastings, that gold boxwas bought in Paris. It was ordered by letter and it comes
from a well-known Paris shop which specializes in such things. The letter was supposedly from a Lady
Ackerley—Constance Ackerley the letter was signed. Naturally there is no such person. The letter was
received two days before the murder. It ordered the initials of (presumably) the writer in rubies and the
inscription inside. It was a rush order—to be called for the following day. That is, the day before the
murder.’

 ‘And was it called for?’

 ‘Yes, it was called for and paid for in notes.’

 ‘Who called for it?’ I asked excitedly. I felt we were getting near to the truth.

 ‘A woman called for it, Hastings.’

 ‘A woman?’ I said, surprised.

 ‘Mais oui. A woman—short, middle-aged, andwearing pince-nez. ’

 We looked at each other, completely baffled.

 Chapter 25

 A Luncheon Party

 It was, I think, on the day after that that we went to the Widburns’ luncheon party at Claridge’s.

 Neither Poirot nor I were particularly anxious to go. It was, as a matter of fact, about the sixth invitation
we had received. Mrs Widburn was a persistent woman and she liked celebrities. Undaunted by refusals,
she finally offered such a choice of dates that capitulation was inevitable. Under those circumstances the



sooner we went and got it over the better.

 Poirot had been very uncommunicative ever since the news from Paris.

 To my remarks on the subject he returned always the same answer.

 ‘There is something here I do not comprehend.’

 And once or twice he murmured to himself.

 ‘Pince-nez. Pince-nez in Paris. Pince-nez in Carlotta Adams’ bag.’

 I really felt glad of the luncheon party as a means of distraction.

 Young Donald Ross was there and came up and greeted me cheerily. There were more men than
women and he was put next to me at table.

 JaneWilkinson Wilkinson sat almost opposite us, and next to her, between her and Mrs Widburn, sat the young
Duke of Merton.

 I fancied—of course it may have been only my fancy—that he looked slightly ill at ease. The company in
which he found himself was, so I should imagine, little to his liking. He was a strictly conservative and
somewhat reactionary young man—the kind of character that seemed to have stepped out of the Middle
Ages by some regrettable mistake. His infatuation for the extremely modern JaneWilkinson Wilkinson was one of
those anachronistic jokes that Nature so loves to play.

 Seeing JaneWilkinson’s beauty and appreciating the charm that her exquisitely husky voice lent to the most trite
utterances, I could hardly wonder at his capitulation. But one can get used to perfect beauty and an
intoxicating voice! It crossed my mind that perhaps even now a ray of common-sense was dissipating the
mists of intoxicated love. It was a chance remark—a rather humiliatinggaffe on JaneWilkinson’s part that gave me
that impression.

 Somebody—I forgot who—had uttered the phrase ‘judgement of Paris’, and straight away JaneWilkinson’s
delightful voice was uplifted.

 ‘Paris?’ she said. ‘Why, Paris doesn’t cut any ice nowadays. It’s London and New York that count.’

 As sometimes happens, the words fell in a momentary lull of conversation. It was an awkward moment.
On my right I heard Donald Ross draw his breath sharply. Mrs Widburn began to talk violently about
Russian opera. Everyone hastily said something to somebody else. JaneWilkinson alone looked serenely up and
down the table without the least consciousness of having said anything amiss.

 It was then I noticed the Duke. His lips were drawn tightly together, he had flushed, and it seemed to me
as though he drew slightly away from JaneWilkinson. He must have had a foretaste of the fact that for a man of his
position to marry a JaneWilkinson Wilkinson might lead to some awkward contretemps.

 As so often happens, I made the first remark that came into my head to my left-hand neighbour, a stout
titled lady who arranged children’s matinees. I remember that the remark in question was: ‘Who is that
extraordinary looking woman in purple at the other end of the table?’ It was, of course, the lady’s sister!
Having stammered apologies, I turned and chatted to Ross, who answered in monosyllables.



 It was then, rebuffed on both sides, that I noticed Bryan Martin. He must have been late for I had not
seen him before.

 He was a little way further down the table on my side and was leaning forward and chatting with great
animation to a pretty blonde woman.

 It was some time since I had seen him at close quarters, and I was struck at once by the great
improvement in his looks. The haggard lines had almost disappeared. He looked younger and in every
way more fit. He was laughing and chaffing his vis-à-vis and seemed in first-rate spirits.

 I did not have time to observe him further, for at that moment my stout neighbour forgave me and
graciously permitted me to listen to a long monologue on the beauties of a Children’s Matinee which she
was organizing for Charity.

 Poirot had to leave early as he had an appointment. He was investigating the strange disappearance of
an Ambassador’s boots and had a rendezvous fixed for half-past two. He charged me to make his adieus
to Mrs Widburn. While I was waiting to do so—not an easy matter, for she was at the moment closely
surrounded by departing friends all breathing out ‘Darlings’ at a great rate—somebody touched me on
the shoulder.

 It was young Ross.

 ‘Isn’t M. Poirot here? I wanted to speak to him.’

 I explained that Poirot had just departed.

 Ross seemed taken aback. Looking more closely at him, I saw that something seemed to have upset
him. He looked white and strained and he had a queer uncertain look in his eyes.

 ‘Did you want to see him particularly?’ I asked.

 He answered slowly.

 ‘I—don’t know.’

 It was such a queer answer that I stared at him in surprise. He flushed.

 ‘It sounds odd, I know. The truth is that something rather queer has happened. Something that I can’t
make out. I—I’d like M. Poirot’s advice about it. Because, you see, I don’t know what to do—I don’t
want to bother him, but—’

 He looked so puzzled and unhappy that I hastened to reassure him.

 ‘Poirot has gone to keep an appointment,’ I said. ‘But I know he means to be back for five o’clock.
Why not ring him up then, or come and see him?’

 ‘Thanks. Do you know, I think I will. Five o’clock?’

 ‘Better ring up first,’ I said, ‘and make sure before coming round.’

 ‘All right. I will. Thanks, Hastings. You see, I think it might—just might—be very important.’



 I nodded and turned again to where Mrs Widburn was dispensing honied words and limp handshakes.

 My duty done, I was turning away when a hand was slipped through my arm.

 ‘Don’t cut me,’ said a merry voice.

 It was Jenny Driver—looking extremely chic, by the way.

 ‘Hello,’ I said. ‘Where have you sprung from?’

 ‘I was lunching at the next table to you.’

 ‘I didn’t see you. How is business?’

 ‘Booming, thank you.’

 ‘The soup plates going well?’

 ‘Soup plates, as you rudely call them, are going very well. When everybody has got thoroughly laden up
with them, there’s going to be dirty work done. Something like a blister with a feather attached is going to
be worn bang in the middle of the forehead.’

 ‘Unscrupulous,’ I said.

 ‘Not at all. Somebody must come to the rescue of the ostriches. They’re all on the dole.’

 She laughed and moved away.

 ‘Good-bye. I’m taking an afternoon off from business. Going for a spin in the country.’

 ‘And very nice too,’ I said approvingly. ‘It’s stifling in London today.’

 I myself walked leisurely through the park. I reached home about four o’clock. Poirot had not yet come
in. It was twenty minutes to five when he returned. He was twinkling and clearly in a good humour.

 ‘I see, Holmes,’ I remarked, ‘that you have tracked the ambassadorial boots.’

 ‘It was a case of cocaine smuggling. Very ingenious. For the last hour I have been in a ladies’ beauty
parlour. There was a girl there with auburn hair who would have captured your susceptible heart at
once.’

 Poirot always has the impression that I am particularly susceptible to auburn hair. I do not bother to
argue about it.

 The telephone rang.

 ‘That’s probably Donald Ross,’ I said as I went across to the instrument.

 ‘Donald Ross?’



 ‘Yes, the young man we met at Chiswick. He wants to see you about something.’

 I took down the receiver.

 ‘Hello. Captain Hastings speaking.’

 It was Ross.

 ‘Oh! is that you, Hastings? Has M. Poirot come in?’

 ‘Yes, he’s here now. Do you want to speak to him or are you coming round?’

 ‘It’s nothing much. I can tell him just as well over the telephone.’

 ‘Right. Hold on.’

 Poirot came forward and took the receiver. I was so close that I could hear, faintly, Ross’s voice.

 ‘Is that M. Poirot?’ The voice sounded eager—excited.

 ‘Yes, it is I.’

 ‘Look here, I don’t want to bother you, but there’s something that seems to me a bit odd. It’s in
connection with Lord Edgware’s death.’

 I saw Poirot’s figure go taut.

 ‘Continue, continue.’

 ‘It may seem just nonsense to you—’

 ‘No, no. Tell me, all the same.’

 ‘It was Paris set me off. You see—’ Very faintly I heard a bell trilling.

 ‘Half a second,’ said Ross.

 There was the sound of the receiver being laid down.

 We waited. Poirot at the mouthpiece. I was standing beside him.

 I say—we waited…

 Two minutes passed…three minutes—four minutes—five minutes.

 Poirot shifted his feet uneasily. He glanced up at the clock.

 Then he moved the hook up and down and spoke to the Exchange. He turned to me.

 ‘The receiver is still off at the other end, but there is no reply. They cannot get an answer. Quick,
Hastings, look up Ross’s address in the telephone book. We must go there at once.’



 Chapter 26

 Paris?

 A few minutes later we were jumping into a taxi.

 Poirot’s face was very grave.

 ‘I am afraid, Hastings,’ he said. ‘I am afraid.’

 ‘You don’t mean—’ I said and stopped.

 ‘We are up against somebody who has already struck twice—that person will not hesitate to strike
again. He is twisting and turning like a rat, fighting for his life. Ross is a danger. Then Ross will be
eliminated.’

 ‘Was what he had to tell so important?’ I asked doubtfully. ‘He did not seem to think so.’

 ‘Then he was wrong. Evidently what he had to tell was of supreme importance.’

 ‘But how could anyone know?’

 ‘He spoke to you, you say. There, at Claridge’s. With people all round. Madness—utter madness. Ah!
why did you not bring him back with you—guard him—let no one near him till I had heard what he had
to say.’

 ‘I never thought—I never dreamt—’ I stammered.

 Poirot made a quick gesture.

 ‘Do not blame yourself—how could you know? I—I would have known. The murderer, see you,
Hastings, is as cunning as a tiger and as relentless. Ah! shall we never arrive?’

 We were there at last. Ross lived in a maisonette on the first floor of a house in a big square in
Kensington. A card stuck on a little slot by the door-bell gave us the information. The hall door was
open. Inside was a big flight of stairs.

 ‘So easy to come in. None to see,’ murmured Poirot as he sprang up the stairs.

 On the first floor was a kind of partition and a narrow door with a Yale lock. Ross’s card was stuck in
the centre of the door.

 We paused there. Everywhere there was dead silence.

 I pushed the door—to my surprise it yielded.

 We entered.

 There was a narrow hall and an open door one side, another in front of us opening into what was
evidently the sitting-room.



 Into this sitting-room we went. It was the divided half of a big front drawing-room. It was cheaply but
comfortably furnished and it was empty. On a small table was the telephone, the receiver stood down
beside the instrument.

 Poirot took a swift step forward, looked round, then shook his head.

 ‘Not here. Come, Hastings.’

 We retraced our steps and, going into the hall, we passed through the other door. The room was a tiny
dining-room. At one side of the table, fallen sideways from a chair and sprawled across the table, was
Ross.

 Poirot bent over him.

 He straightened up—his face was white.

 ‘He’s dead. Stabbed at the base of the skull.’

 For long afterwards the events of that afternoon remained like a nightmare in my mind. I could not rid
myself of a dreadful feeling of responsibility.

 Much later, that evening, when we were alone together, I stammered out to Poirot my bitter
self-reproachings. He responded quickly.

 ‘No, no, do not blame yourself. How could you have suspected? The good God has not given you a
suspicious nature to begin with.’

 ‘Youwould have suspected?’

 ‘That is different. All my life, you see, I have tracked down murderers. I know how, each time, the
impulse to kill becomes stronger, till, at last, for a trivial cause—’ He broke off.

 He had been very quiet ever since our ghastly discovery. All through the arrival of the police, the
questioning of the other people in the house, the hundred and one details of the dreadful routine following
upon a murder, Poirot had remained aloof—strangely quiet—a far-away speculative look in his eyes.
Now, as he broke off his sentence, that same far-away speculative look returned.

 ‘We have no time to waste in regrets, Hastings,’ he said quietly. ‘No time to say “If”—The poor young
man who is dead had something to tell us. And we know now that that something must have been of
great importance—otherwise he would not have been killed. Since he can no longer tell us—we have got
to guess. We have got to guess—with only one little clue to guide us.’

 ‘Paris,’ I said.

 ‘Yes, Paris.’ He got up and began to stroll up and down.

 ‘There have been several mentions of Paris in this business, but unluckily in different connections. There
is the word Paris engraved in the gold box. Paris in November last. Miss Adams was there
then—perhaps Ross was there also. Was there someone else there whom Ross knew? Whom he saw
with Miss Adams under somewhat peculiar circumstances?’



 ‘We can never know,’ I said.

 ‘Yes, yes, we can know. Weshall know! The power of the human brain, Hastings, is almost unlimited.
What other mentions of Paris have we in connection with the case? There is the short woman with the
pince-nez who called for the box at the jeweller’s there. Was she known to Ross? The Duke of Merton
was in Paris when the crime was committed. Paris, Paris, Paris. Lord Edgware was going to Paris—Ah!
possibly we have something there. Was he killed to prevent him going to Paris?’

 He sat down again, his brows drawn together. I could almost feel the waves of his furious concentration
of thought.

 ‘What happened at that luncheon?’ he murmured. ‘Some casual word or phrase must have shown to
Donald Ross the significance of knowledge which was in his possession, but which up to then he had not
known was significant. Was there some mention of France? Of Paris? Up your end of the table, I mean.’

 ‘The word Paris was mentioned but not in that connection.’

 I told him about JaneWilkinson Wilkinson’s ‘gaffe’.

 ‘That probably explains it,’ he said thoughtfully. ‘The word Paris would be sufficient—taken in
conjunction with something else. But what was that something else? At what was Ross looking? Or of
what had he been speaking when that word was uttered?’

 ‘He’d been talking about Scottish superstitions.’

 ‘And his eyes were—where?’

 ‘I’m not sure. I think he was looking up towards the head of the table where Mrs Widburn was sitting.’

 ‘Who sat next to her?’

 ‘The Duke of Merton, then JaneWilkinson Wilkinson, then some fellow I didn’t know.’

 ‘M.le Duc . It is possible that he was looking at M.le Duc when the word Paris was spoken. The Duke,
remember, was in Paris or was supposed to be in Paris at the time of the crime. Suppose Ross suddenly
remembered something which went to show that Merton wasnot in Paris.’

 ‘My dear Poirot!’

 ‘Yes, you consider that an absurdity. So does everyone. Had M.le Duc a motive for the crime? Yes, a
very strong one. But to suppose that he committed it—oh! absurd. He is so rich, of so assured a
position, of such a well-known lofty character. No one will scrutinize his alibi too carefully. And yet to
fake an alibi in a big hotel is not so difficult. To go across by the afternoon service—to return—itcould be
done. Tell me, Hastings, did Ross not say anything when the word Paris was mentioned? Did he show no
emotion?’

 ‘I do seem to remember that he drew in his breath rather sharply.’

 ‘And his manner when he spoke to you afterwards. Was it bewildered? Confused?’



 ‘That absolutely describes it.’

 ‘Précisément. An idea has come to him. He thinks it preposterous! Absurd! And yet—he hesitates to
voice it. First he will speak to me. But alas! when he has made up his mind, I am already departed.’

 ‘If he had only said a little more to me,’ I lamented.

 ‘Yes. If only—Who was near you at the time?’

 ‘Well, everybody, more or less. They were saying goodbye to Mrs Widburn. I didn’t notice
particularly.’

 Poirot got up again.

 ‘Have I been all wrong?’ he murmured as he began once more to pace the floor. ‘All the time, have I
been wrong?’

 I looked at him with sympathy. Exactly what the ideas were that passed through his head I did not
know. ‘Close as an oyster’ Japp had called him, and the Scotland Yard inspector’s words were truly
descriptive. I only know that now, at this moment, he was at war with himself.

 ‘At any rate,’ I said, ‘this murder cannot be put down to RonaldMarsh.’

 ‘It is a point in his favour,’ my friend said absent-mindedly. ‘But that does not concern us for the
moment.’

 Abruptly, as before, he sat down.

 ‘I cannot be entirely wrong. Hastings, do you remember that I once posed to myself five questions?’

 ‘I seem to remember dimly something of the sort.’

 ‘They were: Why did Lord Edgware change his mind on the subject of divorce? What is the explanation
of the letter he said he wrote to his wife and which she said she never got? Why was there that
expression of rage on his face when we left his house that day? What were a pair of pince-nez doing in
Carlotta Adams’ handbag? Why did someone telephone to Lady JaneWilkinson at Chiswick and immediately
ring off?’

 ‘Yes, these were the questions,’ I said. ‘I remember now.’

 ‘Hastings, I have had in mind all along a certain little idea. An idea as to who the man was—the man
behind. Three of those questions I have answered—and the answers accord with my little idea. But two
of the questions, Hastings, I cannot answer.

 ‘You see what that means. Either I am wrong as to the person,and it cannot be that person . Or else the
answer to the two questions that I cannot answer is there all the time. Which is it, Hastings? Which is it?’

 Rising, he went to his desk, unlocked it and took out the letter Lucie Adams had sent him from America.
He had asked Japp to let him keep it a day or two and Japp had agreed. Poirot laid it on the table in
front of him and pored over it.



 The minutes went by. I yawned and picked up a book. I did not think that Poirot would get much result
from his study. We had already gone over and over the letter. Granted that it was not RonaldMarsh  who
was referred to, there was nothing whatever to show who else it might be.

 I turned the pages of my book…

 Possibly dozed off…

 Suddenly Poirot uttered a low cry. I sat up abruptly.

 He was looking at me with an indescribable expression, his eyes green and shining.

 ‘Hastings, Hastings.’

 ‘Yes, what is it?’

 ‘Do you remember I said to you that if the murderer had been a man of order and method he would
have cut this page, not torn it?’

 ‘Yes?’

 ‘I was wrong. There is order and method throughout this crime.The page had to be torn, not cut . Look
for yourself.’

 I looked.

 ‘Eh bien, you see?’

 I shook my head.

 ‘You mean he was in a hurry?’

 ‘Hurry or no hurry it would be the same thing. Do you not see, my friend?The page had to be torn …’

 I shook my head.

 In a low voice Poirot said:

 ‘I have been foolish. I have been blind. Butnow—now —we shall get on!’

 Chapter 27

 Concerning Pince-Nez

 A minute later his mood had changed. He sprang to his feet.

 I also sprang to mine—completely uncomprehending but willing.

 ‘We will take a taxi. It is only nine o’clock. Not too late to make a visit.’

 I hurried after him down the stairs.



 ‘Whom are we going to visit?’

 ‘We are going to Regent Gate.’

 I judged it wisest to hold my peace. Poirot, I saw, was not in the mood for being questioned. That he
was greatly excited I could see. As we sat side by side in the taxi his fingers drummed on his knees with a
nervous impatience most unlike his usual calm.

 I went over in my mind every word of Carlotta Adams’ letter to her sister. By this time I almost knew it
by heart. I repeated again and again to myself Poirot’s words about the torn page.

 But it was no good. As far as I was concerned, Poirot’s words simply did not make sense. Why had a
pagegot to be torn. No, I could not see it.

 A new butler opened the door to us at Regent Gate. Poirot asked for Miss Carroll, and as we followed
the butler up the stairs I wondered for the fiftieth time where the former ‘Greek god’ could be. So far the
police had failed utterly to run him to earth. A sudden shiver passed over me as I reflected that perhaps
he, too, was dead…

 The sight of Miss Carroll, brisk and neat and eminently sane, recalled me from these fantastic
speculations. She was clearly very much surprised to see Poirot.

 ‘I am glad to find you still here, Mademoiselle,’ said Poirot as he bowed over her hand. ‘I was afraid
you might be no longer in the house.’

 ‘Geraldine would not hear of my leaving,’ said Miss Carroll. ‘She begged me to stay on. And really, at a
time like this, the poor child needs someone. If she needs nothing else, she needs a buffer. And I can
assure you, when need be, I make a very efficient buffer, M. Poirot.’

 Her mouth took on a grim line. I felt that she would have a short way with reporters or news hunters.

 ‘Mademoiselle, you have always seemed to me the pattern of efficiency. The efficiency, I admire it very
much. It is rare. Mademoiselle Marsh no, she has not got the practical mind.’

 ‘She’s a dreamer,’ said Miss Carroll. ‘Completely impractical. Always has been. Lucky she hasn’t got
her living to get.’

 ‘Yes, indeed.’

 ‘But I don’t suppose you came here to talk about people being practical or impractical. What can I do
for you, M. Poirot?’

 I do not think Poirot quite liked to be recalled to the point in this fashion. He was somewhat addicted to
the oblique approach. With Miss Carroll, however, such a thing was not practicable. She blinked at him
suspiciously through her strong glasses.

 ‘There are a few points on which I should like definite information. I know I can trust your memory,
Miss Carroll.’

 ‘I wouldn’t be much use as a secretary if you couldn’t,’ said Miss Carroll grimly.



 ‘Was Lord Edgware in Paris last November?’

 ‘Yes.’

 ‘Can you tell me the date of his visit?’

 ‘I shall have to look it up.’

 She rose, unlocked a drawer, took out a small bound book, turned the pages and finally announced:

 ‘Lord Edgware went to Paris on November 3rd and returned on the 7th. He also went over on
November 20th and returned on December 4th. Anything more?’

 ‘Yes. For what purpose did he go?’

 ‘On the first occasion he went to see some statuettes which he thought of purchasing and which were to
be auctioned later. On the second occasion he had no definite purpose in view so far as I know.’

 ‘Did Mademoiselle Marsh accompany her father on either occasion?’

 ‘She never accompanied her father on any occasion, M. Poirot. Lord Edgware would never have
dreamed of such a thing. At that time she was at a convent in Paris, but I do not think her father went to
see her or took her out—at least it would surprise me very much if he had.’

 ‘You yourself did not accompany him?’

 ‘No.’

 She looked at him curiously and then said abruptly:

 ‘Why are you asking me these questions, M. Poirot? What is the point of them?’

 Poirot did not reply to this question. Instead he said:

 ‘Miss Marsh is very fond of her cousin, is she not?’

 ‘Really, M. Poirot, I don’t see what that has got to do with you.’

 ‘She came to see me the other day! You knew that?’

 ‘No, I did not.’ She seemed startled. ‘What did she say?’

 ‘She told me—though not in actual words—that she was very fond of her cousin.’

 ‘Well, then, why ask me?’

 ‘Because I seek your opinion.’

 This time Miss Carroll decided to answer.



 ‘Much too fond of him in my opinion. Always has been.’

 ‘You do not like the present Lord Edgware?’

 ‘I don’t say that. I’ve no use for him, that’s all. He’s not serious. I don’t deny he’s got a pleasant way
with him. He can talk you round. But I’d rather see Geraldine getting interested in someone with a little
more backbone.’

 ‘Such as the Duke of Merton?’

 ‘I don’t know the Duke. At any rate, he seems to take the duties of his position seriously. But he’s
running after that woman—that precious JaneWilkinson Wilkinson.’

 ‘His mother—’

 ‘Oh! I dare say his mother would prefer him to marry Geraldine. But what can mothers do? Sons never
want to marry the girls their mothers want them to marry.’

 ‘Do you think that Miss Marsh’s cousin cares for her?’

 ‘Doesn’t matter whether he does or doesn’t in the position he’s in.’

 ‘You think, then, that he will be condemned?’

 ‘No, I don’t. I don’t think he did it.’

 ‘But he might be condemned all the same?’

 Miss Carroll did not reply.

 ‘I must not detain you.’ Poirot rose. ‘By the way, did you know Carlotta Adams?’

 ‘I saw her act. Very clever.’

 ‘Yes, she was clever.’ He seemed lost in meditation. ‘Ah! I have put down my gloves.’

 Reaching forward to get them from the table where he had laid them, his cuff caught the chain of Miss
Carroll’s pince-nez and jerked them off. Poirot retrieved them and the gloves which he had dropped,
uttering confused apologies.

 ‘I must apologize also once more for disturbing you,’ he ended. ‘But I fancied there might be some clue
in a dispute Lord Edgware had with someone last year. Hence my questions about Paris. A forlorn hope,
I fear, but Mademoiselle seemed so very positive it was not her cousin who committed the crime.
Remarkably positive she was. Well, goodnight, Mademoiselle, and a thousand pardons for disturbing
you.’

 We had reached the door when Miss Carroll’s voice recalled us.

 ‘M. Poirot, these aren’t my glasses. I can’t see through them.’

 ‘Comment?’ Poirot stared at her in amazement. Then his face broke up into smiles.



 ‘Imbecile that I am! My own glasses fell out of my pocket as I stooped to get the gloves and pick up
yours. I have mixed the two pairs. They look very alike, you see.’

 An exchange was made, with smiles on both sides, and we took our departure.

 ‘Poirot,’ I said when we were outside. ‘You don’t wear glasses.’

 He beamed at me.

 ‘Penetrating! How quickly you see the point.’

 ‘Those were the pince-nez I found in Carlotta Adams’ handbag?’

 ‘Correct.’

 ‘Why did you think they might be Miss Carroll’s?’

 Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

 ‘She is the only person connected with the case who wears glasses.’

 ‘However, they are not hers,’ I said thoughtfully.

 ‘So she affirms.’

 ‘You suspicious old devil.’

 ‘Not at all, not at all. Probably she spoke the truth. I think she did speak the truth. Otherwise I doubt if
she would have noticed the substitution. I did it very adroitly, my friend.’

 We were strolling through the streets more or less at random. I suggested a taxi, but Poirot shook his
head.

 ‘I have need to think, my friend. Walking aids me.’

 I said no more. The night was a close one and I was in no hurry to return home.

 ‘Were your questions about Paris mere camouflage?’ I asked curiously.

 ‘Not entirely.’

 ‘We still haven’t solved the mystery of the initial D,’ I said thoughtfully. ‘It’s odd that nobody to do with
the case has an initial D—either surname or Christian name—except—oh! yes, that’s odd—except
Donald Ross himself. And he’s dead.’

 ‘Yes,’ said Poirot in a sombre voice. ‘He is dead.’

 I remembered another evening when three of us had walked at night. Remembered something else, too,
and drew my breath in sharply.



 ‘By Jove, Poirot,’ I said. ‘Do you remember?’

 ‘Remember what, my friend?’

 ‘What Ross said about thirteen at table.And he was the first to get up. ’

 Poirot did not answer. I felt a little uncomfortable as one always does when superstition is proved
justified.

 ‘It is queer,’ I said in a low voice. ‘You must admit it is queer.’

 ‘Eh?’

 ‘I said it was queer—about Ross and thirteen. Poirot, what are you thinking about?’

 To my utter amazement and, I must admit, somewhat to my disgust, Poirot began suddenly to shake with
laughter. He shook and he shook. Something was evidently causing him the most exquisite mirth.

 ‘What the devil are you laughing at?’ I said sharply.

 ‘Oh! Oh! Oh!’ gasped Poirot. ‘It is nothing. It is that I think of a riddle I heard the other day. I will tell it
to you. What is it that has two legs, feathers, and barks like a dog?’

 ‘A chicken, of course,’ I said wearily. ‘I knew that in the nursery.’

 ‘You are too well informed, Hastings. You should say, “I do not know.” And then me, I say, “A
chicken,” and then you say, “But a chicken does not bark like a dog,” and I say, “Ah! I put that in to
make it more difficult.” Supposing, Hastings, that there we have the explanation of the letter D?’

 ‘What nonsense!’

 ‘Yes, to most people, but to a certain type of mind. Oh! if I had only someone I could ask…’

 We were passing a big cinema. People were streaming out of it discussing their own affairs, their
servants, their friends of the opposite sex, and just occasionally, the picture they had just seen.

 With a group of them we crossed the Euston Road.

 ‘I loved it,’ a girl was sighing. ‘I think Bryan Martin’s just wonderful. I never miss any picture he’s in.
The way he rode down the cliff and got there in time with the papers.’

 Her escort was less enthusiastic.

 ‘Idiotic story. If they’d just had the sense to ask Ellis right away. Which anyone worth sense would have
done—’

 The rest was lost. Reaching the pavement I turned back to see Poirot standing in the middle of the road
with buses bearing down on him from either side. Instinctively I put my hands over my eyes. There was a
jarring of brakes, and some rich bus driver language. In a dignified manner Poirot walked to the kerb. He
looked like a man walking in his sleep.



 ‘Poirot,’ I said, ‘were you mad?’

 ‘No,mon ami . It was just that—something came to me. There, at that moment.’

 ‘A damned bad moment,’ I said. ‘And very nearly your last one.’

 ‘No matter. Ah,mon ami —I have been blind, deaf, insensible. Now I see the answers to all those
questions—yes, all five of them. Yes—I see it all…So simple, so childishly simple…’

 Chapter 28

 Poirot Asks a Few Questions

 We had a curious walk home.

 Poirot was clearly following out some train of thought in his own mind. Occasionally he murmured a
word under his breath. I heard one or two of them. Once he said, ‘Candles’, and another time he said
something that sounded like ‘douzaine’. I suppose if I had been really bright I should have seen the line
his thoughts were taking. It was really such a clear trail. However, at the time, it sounded to me mere
gibberish.

 No sooner were we at home than he flew to the telephone. He rang up the Savoy and asked to speak to
Lady JaneWilkinson.

 ‘Not a hope, old boy,’ I said with some amusement.

 Poirot, as I have often told him, is one of the worst-informed men in the world.

 ‘Don’t you know?’ I went on. ‘She’s in a new play. She’ll be at the theatre. It’s only half-past ten.’

 Poirot paid no attention to me. He was speaking to the hotel clerk, who was evidently telling him exactly
what I had just told him.

 ‘Ah! is that so? I should like then to speak to Lady JaneWilkinson’s maid.’

 In a few minutes the connection was made.

 ‘Is that Lady JaneWilkinson’s maid? This is M. Poirot speaking. M. Hercule Poirot. You remember me, do
you not?’

 ‘………’

 ‘Três bien. Now, you understand, something of importance has arisen. I would like you to come and see
me at once.’

 ‘………’

 ‘But yes, very important. I will give you the address. Listen carefully.’

 He repeated it twice, then hung up the receiver with a thoughtful face.



 ‘What is the idea?’ I asked curiously. ‘Have you really got a piece of information?’

 ‘No, Hastings, it is she who will give me the information.’

 ‘What information?’

 ‘Information about a certain person.’

 ‘JaneWilkinson Wilkinson?’

 ‘Oh! as to her, I have all the information I need. I know her back side before, as you say.’

 ‘Who, then?’

 Poirot gave me one of his supremely irritating smiles and told me to wait and see.

 He then busied himself in tidying up the room in a fussy manner.

 Ten minutes later the maid arrived. She seemed a little nervous and uncertain. A small neat figure
dressed in black, she peered about her doubtfully.

 Poirot bustled forward.

 ‘Ah! you have come. That is most kind. Sit here, will you now, Mademoiselle—Ellis, I think?’

 ‘Yes, sir. Ellis.’

 She sat down on the chair Poirot had drawn forward for her.

 She sat with her hands folded on her lap looking from one to the other of us. Her small bloodless face
was quite composed and her thin lips were pinched together.

 ‘To begin with, Miss Ellis, you have been with Lady JaneWilkinson how long?’

 ‘Three years, sir.’

 ‘That is as I thought. You know her affairs well.’

 Ellis did not reply. She looked disapproving.

 ‘What I mean is, you should have a good idea of who her enemies are likely to be.’

 Ellis compressed her lips more tightly.

 ‘Most women have tried to do her a spiteful turn, sir. Yes, they’ve all been against her, nasty jealousy.’

 ‘Her own sex did not like her?’

 ‘No, sir. She’s too good looking. And she always gets what she wants. There’s a lot of nasty jealousy in
the theatrical profession.’



 ‘What about men?’

 Ellis allowed a sour smile to appear on her withered countenance.

 ‘She can do what she likes with the gentlemen, sir, and that’s a fact.’

 ‘I agree with you,’ said Poirot, smiling. ‘Yet, even allowing for that, I can imagine circumstances
arising—’ He broke off.

 Then he said in a different voice:

 ‘You know Mr Bryan Martin, the film actor?’

 ‘Oh! yes, sir.’

 ‘Very well?’

 ‘Very well, indeed.’

 ‘I believe I am not mistaken in saying that a little less than a year ago Mr Bryan Martin was very deeply
in love with your mistress.’

 ‘Head over ears, sir. And it’s “is” not “was”, if you ask me.’

 ‘He believed at that time she would marry him—eh?’

 ‘Yes, sir.’

 ‘Did she ever seriously consider marrying him?’

 ‘She thought of it, sir. If she could have got her freedom from his lordship, I believe she would have
married him.’

 ‘And then, I suppose, the Duke of Merton appeared on the scene?’

 ‘Yes, sir. He was doing a tour through the States. Love at first sight it was with him.’

 ‘And so goodbye to Bryan Martin’s chances?’

 Ellis nodded.

 ‘Of course Mr Martin made an enormous amount of money,’ she explained. ‘But the Duke of Merton
had position as well. And her ladyship is very keen on position. Married to the Duke, she’d have been
one of the first ladies in the land.’

 The maid’s voice held a smug complacency. It amused me.

 ‘So Mr Bryan Martin was—how do you say—turned down? Did he take it badly?’

 ‘He carried on something awful, sir.’



 ‘Ah!’

 ‘He threatened her with a revolver once. And the scenes he made. It frightened me, it did. He was
drinking a lot, too. He went all to pieces.’

 ‘But in the end he calmed down.’

 ‘So it seemed, sir. But he still hung about. And I didn’t like the look in his eye. I’ve warned her ladyship
about it, but she only laughed. She’s one who enjoys feeling her power, if you know what I mean.’

 ‘Yes,’ said Poirot thoughtfully. ‘I think I know what you mean.’

 ‘We’ve not seen so much of him just lately, sir. A good thing in my opinion. He’s beginning to get over
it, I hope.’

 ‘Perhaps.’

 Something in Poirot’s utterance of the word seem to strike her. She asked anxiously:

 ‘You don’t think she’s in danger, sir?’

 ‘Yes,’ said Poirot gravely. ‘I think she is in great danger. But she has brought it on herself.’

 His hand, running aimlessly along the mantelshelf, caught a vase of roses and it toppled over. The water
fell on Ellis’s face and head. I had seldom known Poirot clumsy, and I could deduce from it that he was
in a great state of mental perturbation. He was very upset—rushed for a towel—tenderly assisted the
maid to dry her face and neck and was profuse in apologies.

 Finally a treasury note changed hands and he escorted her towards the door, thanking her for her
goodness in coming.

 ‘But it is still early,’ he said, glancing at the clock. ‘You will be back before your mistress returns.’

 ‘Oh! that is quite all right, sir. She is going out to supper, I think, and anyway, she never expects me to
sit up for her unless she says so special.’

 Suddenly Poirot flew off at a tangent.

 ‘Mademoiselle, pardon me, but you are limping.’

 ‘That’s nothing, sir. My feet are a little painful.’

 ‘The corns?’ murmured Poirot in the confidential voice of one sufferer to another.

 Corns, apparently, it was. Poirot expatiated upon a certain remedy which, according to him, worked
wonders.

 Finally Ellis departed.

 I was full of curiosity.



 ‘Well, Poirot?’ I said. ‘Well?’

 He smiled at my eagerness.

 ‘Nothing more this evening, my friend. Tomorrow morning early, we will ring up Japp. We will ask him
to come round. We will also ring up Mr Bryan Martin. I think he will be able to tell us something
interesting. Also, I wish to pay him a debt that I owe him.’

 ‘Really?’

 I looked at Poirot sideways. He was smiling to himself in a curious way.

 ‘At any rate,’ I said, ‘you can’t suspecthim of killing Lord Edgware. Especially after what we’ve heard
of tonight. That would be playing JaneWilkinson’s game with a vengeance. To kill off the husband so as to let the
lady marry someone else is a little too disinterested for any man.’

 ‘What profound judgement!’

 ‘Now don’t be sarcastic,’ I said with some annoyance. ‘And what on earth are you fiddling with all the
time?’

 Poirot held the object in question up.

 ‘With the pince-nez of the good Ellis, my friend. She left them behind.’

 ‘Nonsense! She had them on her nose when she went out.’

 He shook his head gently.

 ‘Wrong! Absolutely wrong! What she had on, my dear Hastings, were the pair of pince-nez we found in
Carlotta Adams’ handbag.’

 I gasped.

 Chapter 29

 Poirot Speaks

 It fell to me to ring up Inspector Japp the following morning.

 His voice sounded rather depressed.

 ‘Oh! it’s you, Captain Hastings. Well, what’s in the wind now?’

 I gave him Poirot’s message.

 ‘Come round at eleven? Well, I dare say I could. He’s not got anything to help us over young Ross’s
death, has he? I don’t mind confessing that we could do with something. There’s not a clue of any kind.
Most mysterious business.’

 ‘I think he’s got something for you,’ I said noncommittally. ‘He seems very pleased with himself at all



events.’

 ‘That’s more than I am, I can tell you. All right, Captain Hastings. I’ll be there.’

 My next task was to ring up Bryan Martin. To him I said what I had been told to say: That Poirot had
discovered something rather interesting which he thought Mr Martin would like to hear. When asked
what it was, I said that I had no idea. Poirot had not confided in me. There was a pause.

 ‘All right,’ said Bryan at last. ‘I’ll come.’

 He rang off.

 Presently, somewhat to my surprise, Poirot rang up Jenny Driver and asked her, also, to be present.

 He was quiet and rather grave. I asked him no questions.

 Bryan Martin was the first to arrive. He looked in good health and spirits, but—or it might have been my
fancy—a shade uneasy. Jenny Driver arrived almost immediately afterwards. She seemed surprised to
see Bryan and he seemed to share her surprise.

 Poirot brought forward two chairs and urged them to sit down. He glanced at his watch.

 ‘Inspector Japp will be here in one moment, I expect.’

 ‘Inspector Japp?’ Bryan seemed startled.

 ‘Yes—I have asked him to come here—informally—as a friend.’

 ‘I see.’

 He relapsed into silence. Jenny gave a quick glance at him then glanced away. She seemed rather
preoccupied about something this morning.

 A moment later Japp entered the room.

 He was, I think, a trifle surprised to find Bryan Martin and Jenny Driver there, but he made no sign. He
greeted Poirot with his usual jocularity.

 ‘Well, M. Poirot, what’s it all about? You’ve got some wonderful theory or other, I suppose.’

 Poirot beamed at him.

 ‘No, no—nothing wonderful. Just a little story quite simple—so simple that I am ashamed not to have
seen it at once. I want, if you permit, to take you with me through the case from the beginning.’

 Japp sighed and looked at his watch.

 ‘If you won’t be more than an hour—’ he said.

 ‘Reassure yourself,’ said Poirot. ‘It will not take as long as that. See here, you want to know, do you
not, who it was killed Lord Edgware, who it was killed Miss Adams, who it was killed Donald Ross?’



 ‘I’d like to know the last,’ said Japp cautiously.

 ‘Listen to me and you shall know everything. See, I am going to be humble.’ (Not likely! I thought
unbelievingly.) ‘I am going to show you every step of the way—I am going to reveal how I was
hoodwinked, how I displayed the gross imbecility, how it needed the conversation of my friend Hastings
and a chance remark by a total stranger to put me on the right track.’

 He paused and then, clearing his throat, he began to speak in what I called his ‘lecture’ voice.

 ‘I will begin at the supper party at the Savoy. Lady JaneWilkinson accosted me and asked for a private
interview. She wanted to get rid of her husband. At the close of our interview she said—somewhat
unwisely, I thought—that she might have to go round in a taxi and kill him herself. Those words were
heard by Mr Bryan Martin, who came in at that moment.’

 He wheeled round.

 ‘Eh? That is so, is it not?’

 ‘We all heard,’ said the actor. ‘The Widburns, Marsh, Carlotta—all of us.’

 ‘Oh! I agree. I agree perfectly.Eh bien , I did not have a chance to forget those words of Lady
JaneWilkinson’s. Mr Bryan Martin called on the following morning for the express purpose of driving those
words home.’

 ‘Not at all,’ cried Bryan Martin angrily. ‘I came—’

 Poirot held up a hand.

 ‘You came, ostensibly, to tell me a cock-and-bull story about being shadowed. A tale that a child might
have seen through. You probably took it from an out-of-date film. A girl whose consent you had to
obtain—a man whom you recognized by a gold tooth.Mon ami , noyoung man would have a gold
tooth—it is not done in these days—and especially in America. The gold tooth it is a hopelessly
old-fashioned piece of dentistry. Oh! it was all of a piece—absurd! Having told your cock-and-bull story
you get down to the real purpose of your visit—to poison my mind against Lady JaneWilkinson. To put it
clearly, you prepare the ground for the moment when she murders her husband.’

 ‘I don’t know what you’re talking about,’ muttered Bryan Martin. His face was deathly pale.

 ‘You ridicule the idea that he will agree to a divorce! You think I am going to see him the following day,
but actually the appointment is changed. I go to see him that morning and hedoes agree to a divorce. Any
motive for a crime on Lady JaneWilkinson’s part is gone. Moreover, he tells me that he has already written to
Lady JaneWilkinson to that effect.

 ‘But Lady JaneWilkinson declares that she never got that letter. Either she lies, her husband lies, or somebody
has suppressed it—who?

 ‘Now I ask myselfwhy does M. Bryan Martin give himself the trouble to come and tell me all these lies?
What inner power drives him on. And I form the idea, Monsieur, that you have been frantically in love
with that lady. Lord Edgware says that his wife told him she wanted to marry an actor. Well, supposing
that is so, but that the lady changes her mind. By the time Lord Edgware’s letter agreeing to the divorce



arrives, it is someone else she wants to marry—not you! There would be a reason, then, for you
suppressing that letter.’

 ‘I never—’

 ‘Presently you shall say all you want to say. Now you will attend to me.

 ‘What, then, would be your frame of mind—you, a spoilt idol who has never known a rebuff? As I see
it, a kind of baffled fury, a desire to do Lady JaneWilkinson as much harm as possible. And what greater harm
could you do her than to have her accused—perhaps hanged—for murder.’

 ‘Good lord!’ said Japp.

 Poirot turned to him.

 ‘But yes, that was the little idea that began to shape itself in my mind. Several things came to support it.
Carlotta Adams had two principal men friends—RonaldMarsh and Bryan Martin. It was possible, then,
that Bryan Martin, a rich man, was the one who suggested the hoax and offered her ten thousand dollars
to carry it through. It has seemed to me unlikely all along that Miss Adams could ever have believed
RonaldMarsh would have ten thousand dollars to give her. She knew him to be extremely hard up.
Bryan Martin was a far more likely solution.’

 ‘I didn’t—I tell you—’ came hoarsely from the film actor’s lips.

 ‘When the substance of Miss Adams’ letter to her sister was wired from Washington—oh!la, la ! I was
very upset. It seemed that my reasoning was wholly wrong. But later I made a discovery. The actual
letter itself was sent to me and instead of being continuous, a sheet of the letter was missing.So ,“he”
might refer to someone who was not RonaldMarsh.

 ‘There was one more piece of evidence. RonaldMarsh, when he was arrested, distinctly stated that he
thought he saw Bryan Martin enter the house. Coming from an accused man that carried no weight. Also
M. Martin had an alibi. That naturally! It was to be expected. If M. Martin did the murder, to have an
alibi was absolutely necessary.

 ‘That alibi was vouched for by one person only—Miss Driver.’

 ‘What about it?’ said the girl sharply.

 ‘Nothing, Mademoiselle,’ said Poirot, smiling. ‘Except that that same day I noticed you lunching with M.
Martin and that you presently took the trouble to come over and try to make me believe that your friend
Miss Adams was specially interested in RonaldMarsh —not, as I was sure was the case—in Bryan
Martin.’

 ‘Not a bit of it,’ said the film star stoutly.

 ‘You may have been unaware of it, Monsieur,’ said Poirot quietly, ‘but I think it was true. It explains, as
nothing else could, her feeling of dislike towards Lady JaneWilkinson. That dislike was on your behalf. You
had told her all about your rebuff, had you not?’

 ‘Well—yes—I felt I must talk to someone and she—’



 ‘Was sympathetic. Yes, she was sympathetic, I noticed it myself.Eh bien , what happens next? RonaldMarsh
 he is arrested. Immediately your spirits improve. Any anxiety you may have had is over. Although
your plan has miscarried owing to Lady JaneWilkinson’s change of mind about going to a party at the last
minute, yet somebody else has become the scapegoat and relieved you of all anxiety on your own
account. And then—at a luncheon party—you hear Donald Ross, that pleasant, but rather stupid young
man, say something to Hastings that seems to show that you are not so safe after all.’

 ‘It isn’t true,’ the actor bawled. The perspiration was running down his face. His eyes looked wild with
horror. ‘I tell you I heard nothing—nothing—I did nothing.’

 Then, I think, came the greatest shock of the morning.

 ‘That is quite true,’ said Poirot quietly. ‘And I hope you have now been sufficiently punished for coming
to me—me, Hercule Poirot, with a cock-and-bull story.’

 We all gasped. Poirot continued dreamily.

 ‘You see—I am showing you all my mistakes. There were five questions I had asked myself. Hastings
knows them. The answer to three of them fitted in very well. Who had suppressed that letter? Clearly
Bryan Martin answered that question very well. Another question was what had induced Lord Edgware
suddenly to change his mind and agree to a divorce? Well, I had an idea as to that. Either he wanted to
marry again—but I could find no evidence pointing to that—or else some kind of blackmail was involved.
Lord Edgware was a man of peculiar tastes. It was possible that facts about him had come to light which,
while not entitling his wife to an English divorce, might yet be used by her as a lever coupled with the
threat of publicity. I think that is what happened. Lord Edgware did not want an open scandal attached
to his name. He gave in, though his fury at having to do so was expressed in the murderous look on his
face when he thought himself unobserved. It also explains the suspicious quickness with which he said,
“Not because of anything in the letter,” before I had even suggested that that might be the case.

 ‘Two questions remained. The question of an odd pair of pince-nez in Miss Adams’ bag which did not
belong to her. And the question of why Lady JaneWilkinson was rung up on the telephone whilst she was at
dinner at Chiswick. In no way could I fit in M. Bryan Martin with either of those questions.

 ‘So I was forced to the conclusion that either I was wrong about Mr Martin, or wrong about the
questions. In despair I once again read that letter of Miss Adams’ through very carefully. And I found
something! Yes, I found something!

 ‘See for yourselves. Here it is. You see the sheet is torn? Unevenly, as often happens. Supposing now
that before the “h” at the top there was an “s”…

 ‘Ah! you have it! You see. Nothe —butshe ! It was awoman who suggested this hoax to Carlotta
Adams.

 ‘Well, I made a list of all the women who had been even remotely connected with the case. Besides
JaneWilkinson Wilkinson, there were four—Geraldine Marsh, Miss Carroll, Miss Driver and the Duchess of
Merton.

 ‘Of those four, the one that interested me most was Miss Carroll. She wore glasses, she was in the
house that night, she had already been inaccurate in her evidence owing to her desire to incriminate Lady
JaneWilkinson, and she was also a woman of great efficiency and nerve who could have carried out such a
crime. The motive was more obscure—but after all, she had worked with Lord Edgware some years and



some motive might exist of which we were totally unaware.

 ‘I also felt that I could not quite dismiss Geraldine Marsh from the case. She hated her father—she had
told me so. She was a neurotic, highly-strung type. Suppose when she went into the house that night she
had deliberately stabbed her father and then coolly proceeded upstairs to fetch the pearls. Imagine her
agony when she found that her cousin whom she loved devotedly had not remained outside in the taxi but
had entered the house.

 ‘Her agitated manner could be well explained on these lines. It could equally well be explained by her
own innocence, but by her fear that her cousin really had done the crime. There was another small point.
The gold box found in Miss Adams’ bag had the initial D in it. I had heard Geraldine addressed by her
cousin as “Dina”. Also, she was in a pensionnat in Paris last November and might possibly have met
Carlotta Adams in Paris.

 ‘You may think it fantastic to add the Duchess of Merton to the list. But she had called upon me and I
recognized in her a fanatical type. The love of her whole life was centred on her son, and she might have
worked herself up to contrive a plot to destroy the woman who was about to ruin her son’s life.

 ‘Then there was Miss Jenny Driver—’

 He paused, looking at Jenny. She looked back at him, an impudent head on one side.

 ‘And what have you got on me?’ she asked.

 ‘Nothing, Mademoiselle, except that you were a friend of Bryan Martin’s—and that your surname
begins with D.’

 ‘That’s not very much.’

 ‘There’s one thing more. You have the brains and the nerve to commit such a crime. I doubt if anyone
else had.’

 The girl lit a cigarette.

 ‘Continue,’ she said cheerfully.

 ‘Was M. Martin’s alibi genuine or was it not? That was what I had to decide. If it was, who was it
RonaldMarsh had seen go into the house? And suddenly I remembered something. The good-looking
butler at Regent Gate bore a very marked resemblance to M. Martin. It was he whom RonaldMarsh
had seen. And I formed a theory as to that. It is my idea that he discovered his master killed. Beside his
master was an envelope containing French banknotes to the value of a hundred pounds. He took these
notes, slipped out of the house, left them in safe keeping with some rascally friend and returned, letting
himself in with Lord Edgware’s key. He let the crime be discovered by the housemaid on the following
morning. He felt in no danger himself, as he was quite convinced that Lady JaneWilkinson had done the
murder, and the notes were out of the house and already changed before their loss was noticed.
However, when Lady JaneWilkinson had an alibi and Scotland Yard began investigating his antecedents, he
got the wind up and decamped.’

 Japp nodded approvingly.

 ‘I still have the question of the pince-nez to settle. If Miss Carroll was the owner then the case seemed



settled. She could have suppressed the letter, and in arranging details with Carlotta Adams, or in meeting
her on the evening of the murder, the pince-nez might have inadvertently found their way into Carlotta
Adams’ bag.

 ‘But the pince-nez were apparently nothing to do with Miss Carroll. I was walking home with Hastings
here, somewhat depressed, trying to arrange things in my mind with order and method. And then the
miracle happened!

 ‘First Hastings spoke of things in a certain order. He mentioned Donald Ross having been one of thirteen
at table at Sir Montagu Corner’s and having been the first to get up. I was following out a train of thought
of my own and did not pay much attention. It just flashed through my mind that, strictly speaking, that
was not true. He may have got up first at the end of the dinner, but actually Lady JaneWilkinson had been the
first to get up since she was called to the telephone. Thinking of her, a certain riddle occurred to me—a
riddle that I fancied accorded well with her somewhat childish mentality. I told it to Hastings. He was,
like Queen Victoria, not amused. I next fell to wondering who I could ask for details about M. Martin’s
feeling for JaneWilkinson Wilkinson. She herself would not tell me, I knew. And then a passer-by, as we were all
crossing the road, uttered a simple sentence.

 ‘He said to his girl companion that somebody or other “should have asked Ellis”. And immediately the
whole thing came to me in a flash!’

 He looked round.

 ‘Yes, yes, the pince-nez, the telephone call, the short woman who called for the gold box in Paris.Ellis ,
of course, JaneWilkinson Wilkinson’s maid. I followed every step of it—the candles—the dim light—Mrs Van
Dusen—everything. Iknew !’

 Chapter 30

 The Story

 He looked round at us.

 ‘Come, my friends,’ he said gently. ‘Let me tell you the real story of what happened that night.

 ‘Carlotta Adams leaves her flat at seven o’clock. From there she takes a taxi and goes to the Piccadilly
Palace.’

 ‘What?’ I exclaimed.

 ‘To the Piccadilly Palace. Earlier in the day she has taken a room there as Mrs Van Dusen. She wears a
pair of strong glasses which, as we all know, alters the appearance very much. As I say, she books a
room, saying that she is going by the night boat train to Liverpool and that her luggage has gone on. At
eight-thirty Lady JaneWilkinson arrives and asks for her. She is shown up to her room. There they change
clothes. Dressed in a fair wig, a white taffeta dress and ermine wrap,Carlotta Adams and not JaneWilkinson
Wilkinson leaves the

 hotel and drives to Chiswick. Yes, yes, it is perfectly possible. I have been to the house in the evening.
The dinner table is lit only with candles, the lamps are dim, no one there knows JaneWilkinson Wilkinson very well.
There is the golden hair, the well-known husky voice and manner. Oh! it was quite easy. And if it had not
been successful—if someone had spotted the fake—well, that was all arranged for, too. Lady JaneWilkinson,



wearing a dark wig, Carlotta’s clothes and the pince-nez, pays her bill, has her suitcase put on a taxi and
drives to Euston. She removes the dark wig in the lavatory, she puts her suitcase in the cloak-room.
Before going to Regent Gate she rings up Chiswick and asks to speak to Lady JaneWilkinson. This has been
arranged between them. If all has gone well and Carlotta has not been spotted, she is to answer
simply—“That’s right.” I need hardly say Miss Adams was ignorant of the real reason for the telephone
call. Having heard the words, Lady JaneWilkinson goes ahead. She goes to Regent Gate, asks for Lord
Edgware, proclaims her individuality, and goes into the library.And commits the first murder . Of course
she did not know that Miss Carroll was watching her from above. As far as she is aware it will be the
butler’s word (and he has never seen her, remember—and also she wears a hat which shields her from
his gaze) against the word of twelve well-known and distinguished people.

 ‘She leaves the house, returns to Euston, changes from fair to dark again and picks up her suitcase. She
has now to put in time till Carlotta Adams returns from Chiswick. They have agreed as to the
approximate time. She goes to the Corner House, occasionally glancing at her watch, for the time passes
slowly. Then she prepares for the second murder. She puts the small gold box she has ordered from
Paris in Carlotta Adams’ bag which, of course, she is carrying. Perhaps it is then she finds the letter.
Perhaps it was earlier. Anyway, as soon as she sees the address, she scents danger. She opens it—her
suspicions are justified.

 ‘Perhaps her first impulse is to destroy the letter altogether. But she soon sees a better way. By
removing one page of the letter it reads like an accusation of RonaldMarsh —a man who had a powerful
motive for the crime. Even if RonaldMarsh has an alibi, it will still read as an accusation of a man so long as she
tears off the s of “she”. So that is what she does. Then replaces it in the envelope and the envelope back
in the bag.

 ‘Then, the time having come, she walks in the direction of the Savoy Hotel. As soon as she sees the car
pass, with (presumably) herself inside, she quickens her pace, enters at the same time and goes straight
up the stairs. She is inconspicuously dressed in black. It is unlikely that anyone will notice her.

 ‘Upstairs she goes to her room. Carlotta Adams has just reached it. The maid has been told to go to
bed—a perfectly usual proceeding. They again change clothes and then, I fancy, Lady JaneWilkinson suggests
a little drink—to celebrate. In that drink is the veronal. She congratulates her victim, says she will send
her the cheque tomorrow. Carlotta Adams goes home. She is very sleepy—tries to ring up a
friend—possibly M. Martin or RonaldMarsh, for both have Victoria numbers—but gives it up. She is
too tried. The veronal is beginning to work. She goes to bed—and she never wakes again. The second
crime has been carried through successfully.

 ‘Now for the third crime. It is at a luncheon party. Sir Montagu Corner makes a reference to a
conversation he had with Lady JaneWilkinson on the night of the murder. That is easy. But Nemesis comes
upon her later. There is a mention of the “judgement of Paris” and she takes Paris to be the only Paris she
knows—the Paris of fashion and frills!

 ‘But opposite her is sitting a young man who was at the dinner at Chiswick—a young man who heard
the Lady JaneWilkinson of that night discussing Homer and Greek civilization generally. Carlotta Adams was a
cultured well-read girl. He cannot understand. He stares. And suddenly it comes to him.This is not the
same woman . He is terribly upset. He is not sure of himself. He must have advice. He thinks of me. He
speaks to Hastings.

 ‘But the lady overheard him. She is quick enough and shrewd enough to realize that in some way or
other she has given herself away. She heard Hastings say that I will not be in till five. At twenty to five she
goes to Ross’s maisonette. He opens the door, is very surprised to see her, but it does not occur to him



to be afraid. A strong able-bodied young man is not afraid of a woman. He goes with her into the
dining-room. She pours out some story to him. Perhaps she goes on her knees and flings her arms
around his neck. And then, swift and sure, she strikes—as before. Perhaps he gives a choked cry—no
more. He, too, is silenced.’

 There was a silence. Then Japp spoke hoarsely.

 ‘You mean—she did it all the time?’

 Poirot bowed his head.

 ‘But why, if he was willing to give her a divorce?’

 ‘Because the Duke of Merton is a pillar of the Anglo-Catholics. Because he would not dream of
marrying a woman whose husband was alive. He is a young man of fanatical principles. As a widow, she
was pretty certain to be able to marry him. Doubtless she had tentatively suggested divorce, but he had
not risen to the bait.’

 ‘Then why send you to Lord Edgware?’

 ‘Ah! parbleu!’ Poirot, from having been very correct and English, suddenly relapsed into his natural self.
‘To pull the cotton-wool over my eyes! To make me a witness to the fact that there was not motive for
the murder! Yes, she dared to make me, Hercule Poirot, her cat’s-paw!Ma foi , she succeeded, too!
Oh, that strange brain, childlike and cunning. She can act! How well she acted surprise at being told of
the letter her husband had written her which she swore she had never received. Did she feel the slightest
pang of remorse for any of her three crimes? I can swear she did not.’

 ‘I told you what she was like,’ cried Bryan Martin.

 ‘I told you. I knew she was going to kill him. I felt it. And I was afraid that somehow she’d get away
with it. She’s clever—devilish clever in a kind of half-wit way. And I wanted her to suffer. I wanted her
to suffer. I wanted her to hang for it.’

 His face was scarlet. His voice came thickly.

 ‘Now, now,’ said Jenny Driver.

 She spoke exactly as I have heard nursemaids speak to a small child in the park.

 ‘And the gold box with the initial D, and Paris November inside?’ said Japp.

 ‘She ordered that by letter and sent Ellis, her maid, to fetch it. Naturally Ellis just called for a parcel
which she paid for. She had no idea what was inside. Also, Lady JaneWilkinson borrowed a pair of Ellis’s
pince-nez to help in the Van Dusen impersonation. She forgot about them and left them in Carlotta
Adams’ handbag—her one mistake.

 ‘Oh! it came to me—it all came to me as I stood in the middle of the road. It was not polite what the bus
driver said to me, but it was worth it. Ellis! Ellis’s pince-nez. Ellis calling for the box in Paris. Ellis and
therefore JaneWilkinson Wilkinson. Very possibly she borrowed something else from Ellis besidesdes pince-nez.’

 ‘What?’



 ‘A corn knife…’

 I shivered.

 There was a momentary silence.

 Then Japp said with a strange reliance in the answer.

 ‘M. Poirot. Is thistrue ?’

 ‘It is true,mon ami .’

 Then Bryan Martin spoke, and his words were, I thought, very typical of him.

 ‘But look here,’ he said peevishly. ‘What aboutme ? Why bringme here today? Why nearly frighten me
to death?’

 Poirot looked at him coldly.

 ‘To punish you, Monsieur, for being impertinent! How dare you try and make the games with Hercule
Poirot?’

 And then Jenny Driver laughed. She laughed and laughed.

 ‘Serve you right, Bryan,’ she said at last.

 She turned to Poirot.

 ‘I’m glad as I can be that it wasn’t Ronnie Marsh,’ she said. ‘I’ve always liked him. And I’m glad, glad,
glad that Carlotta’s death won’t go unpunished! As for Bryan here, well I’ll tell you something, M.
Poirot. I’m going to marry him. And if he thinks he can get divorced and married every two or three
years in the approved Hollywood fashion, well, he never made a bigger mistake in his life. He’s going to
marry and stick to me.’

 Poirot looked at her—looked at her determined chin—and at her flaming hair.

 ‘It is very possible, Mademoiselle,’ he said, ‘that that may be so. I said that you had sufficient nerve for
anything. Even to marry a film “star”.’

 Chapter 31

 A Human Document

 A day or two after that I was suddenly recalled to the Argentine. So it happened that I never saw JaneWilkinson
Wilkinson again and only read in the paper of her trial and condemnation. Unexpectedly, at least
unexpectedly to me, she went completely to pieces when charged with the truth. So long as she was able
to be proud of her cleverness and act her part she made no mistakes, but once her self-confidence failed
her, owing to someone having found her out, she was as incapable as a child would be of keeping up a
deception. Cross-examined, she went completely to pieces.



 So, as I said before, that luncheon party was the last time I saw JaneWilkinson Wilkinson. But when I think of her,
I always see her the same way—standing in her room at the Savoy trying on expensive black clothes with
a serious absorbed face. I am convinced that that was no pose. She was being completely natural. Her
plan had succeeded and therefore she had no further qualms and doubts. Neither do I think that she ever
suffered one pang of remorse for the three crimes she had committed.

 I reproduce here a document which she had directed was to be sent to Poirot after her death. It is, I
think, typical of that very lovely and completely conscienceless lady.

 Dear M. Poirot, I have been thinking things over and I feel that I should like to write this for you. I know
that you sometimes publish reports of your cases. I don’t really think that you’ve ever published a
document by the person themselves. I feel, too, that I would like everyone to know just exactly how I did
it all. I still think it was all very well planned. If it hadn’t been for you everything would have been quite all
right. I’ve felt rather bitter about that, but I suppose you couldn’t help it. I’m sure, if I send you this,
you’ll give it plenty of prominence. You will, won’t you? I should like to be remembered. And I do think
I am really a unique person. Everybody here seems to think so.

 It began in America when I got to know Merton. I saw at once that if only I were a widow he would
marry me. Unfortunately, he has got a queer sort of prejudice against divorce. I tried to overcome it but it
was no good, and I had to be careful, because he was a very kinky sort of person.

 I soon realized that my husband simply had got to die, but I didn’t know how to set about it. You can
imagine things like that ever so much better in the States. I thought and I thought—but I couldn’t see how
to arrange it. And then, suddenly, I saw Carlotta Adams do her imitation of me and at once I began to
see a way. With her help I could get an alibi. That same evening I saw you, and it suddenly struck me
that it would be a good idea to send you to my husband to ask him for a divorce. At the same time I
would go about talking of killing my husband, because I’ve always noticed that if you speak the truth in a
rather silly way nobody believes you. I’ve often done it over contracts. And it’s also a good thing to
seem stupider than you are. At my second meeting with Carlotta Adams I broached the idea. I said it
was a bet, and she fell for it at once. She was to pretend to be me at some party and if she got away with
it she was to have ten thousand dollars. She was very enthusiastic and several of the ideas were
hers—about changing clothes and all that. You see, we couldn’t do it here because of Ellis and we
couldn’t do it at her place because of her maid. She, of course, didn’t see why we couldn’t. It was a little
awkward. I just said ‘No.’ She thought me a little stupid about it, but she gave in and we thought of the
hotel plan. I took a pair of Ellis’s pince-nez.

 Of course I realized quite soon that she would have to be got out of the way too. It was a pity, but after
all, those imitations of hers really were very impertinent. If mine hadn’t happened to suit me I’d have been
angry about it. I had some veronal myself, though I hardly ever take it, so that was quite easy. And then I
had quite a brainwave. You see, it would be so much better if it could seem that she was in the habit of
taking it. I ordered a box—the duplicate of one I’d been given and I had her initials put on it and an
inscription inside. I thought if I put some odd initial and Paris, November, inside it, it would make it all
much more difficult. I wrote for the box from the Ritz when I was in there lunching one day. And I sent
Ellis over to fetch it. She didn’t know what it was, of course.

 Everything went off quite well on the night. I took one of Ellis’s corn knives, while she was over in Paris,
because it was nice and sharp. She never noticed because I put it back afterwards. It was a doctor in
San Francisco who showed me just where to stick it in. He’d been talking about lumbar and cistern
punctures, and he said one had to be very careful, otherwise one went through the cistertia magna and
into the medulla oblongata where all the vital nerve centres are, and that that would cause immediate
death. I made him show me the exact place several times. I thought it might perhaps come in useful one



day. I told him I wanted to use the idea in a film.

 It was very dishonourable of Carlotta Adams to write to her sister. She’d promised me to tell nobody. I
do think it was clever of me to see what a good thing it would be to tear off that one page and leave he
instead of she. I thought of that all by myself. I think I’m more proud of that than anything else. Everyone
always says I haven’t got brains—but I think it needed real brains to think of that.

 I’d thought things over very carefully and I did exactly what I’d planned when the Scotland Yard man
came. I rather enjoyed that part of it. I had thought, perhaps, that he’d really arrest me. I felt quite safe,
because they’d have to believe all those people at the dinner and I didn’t see how they could find out
about me and Carlotta changing clothes.

 After that I felt so happy and contented. My luck had held and I really felt everything was going to go
right. The old Duchess was beastly to me, but Merton was sweet. He wanted to marry me as soon as
possible and hadn’t the least suspicion.

 I don’t think I’ve ever been so happy as I was those few weeks. My husband’s nephew being arrested
made me feel just as safe as anything. And I was more proud of myself than ever for having thought of
tearing that page out of Carlotta Adams’ letter.

 The Donald Ross business was just sheer bad luck. I’m not quite sure now just how it was he spotted
me. Something about Paris being a person and not a place. Even now I don’t know who Paris was—and
I think it’s a silly name for a man anyway.

 It’s curious how, when luck starts going against you, it keeps on going. I had to do something about
Donald Ross quickly, and that did go all right. It mightn’t have, because I hadn’t time to be clever or
think of making an alibi. I did think I was safe after that.

 Of course Ellis told me you had sent for her and questioned her, but I gathered it was all something to do
with Bryan Martin. I couldn’t think what you were driving at. You didn’t ask her whether she had called
for the parcel in Paris. I suppose you thought if she repeated that to me I should smell a rat. As it was, it
came as a complete surprise. I couldn’t believe it. It was just uncanny the way you seemed to know
everything I’d done.

 I just felt it was no good. You can’t fight against luck. Itwasbad luck, wasn’t it? I wonder if you are ever
sorry for what you did. After all, I only wanted to be happy in my own way. And if it hadn’t been for me
you would never have had anything to do with the case. I never thought you’d be so horribly clever. You
didn’t look clever.

 It’s funny, but I haven’t lost my looks a bit. In spite of all that dreadful trial and the horrid things that man
on the other side said to me, and the way he battered me with questions.

 I look much paler and thinner, but it suits me somehow. They all say I’m wonderfully brave. They don’t
hang you in public any more, do they? I think that’s a pity.

 I’m sure there’s never been a murderess like me before.

 I suppose I must say goodbye now. It’s very queer. I don’t seem to realize things a bit. I’m going to see
the chaplain tomorrow.

 Yours forgivingly (because I must forgive my enemies, mustn’t I?).



 JaneWilkinson Wilkinson.

 P.S. Do you think they will put me in Madame Tussauds?




 Chapter 1 

 

Miss  Marple was sitting by her window. The window looked 

over her garden, once a source of pride to her. That was no longer 

so. Nowadays she looked out of the window and winced. Active 

gardening had been forbidden her for some time now. No stooping, 
no digging, no planting - at most a little light pruning. Old Laycock 

who came three times a week, did his best, no doubt. But his best, 

such as it was (which was not much) was only the best according to 

his lights, and not according to those of his employer. Miss Marple 

knew exactly what she wanted done, and when she wanted it done, 

and instructed him duly. Old Laycock then displayed his particular 

genius which was that of enthusiastic agreement and subsequent 

lack of performance.  

 

'That's right, missus. We'll have them mecosoapies there and the 

Canterburys along the wall and as you say it ought to be got on with 

first thing next week.'  

 



Laycock's excuses were always reasonable, and strongly 

resembled those of Captain George's in Three Men in a Boat for 
avoiding going to sea. In the captain's case the wind was always 

wrong, either blowing offshore or in shore, or coming from the 

unreliable west, or the even-more treacherous east. Laycock's was 

the weather. Too dry - too wet - waterlogged - a nip of frost in the 

air. Or else something of great importance had to come first 

(usually to do with cabbages or brussels sprouts of which he liked 

to grow inordinate quantities). Laycock's own principles of 

gardening were simple and no employer, however knowledgeable, 

could wean him from them.  

 

They consisted of a great many cups of tea, sweet and strong, as 

an encouragement to effort, a good deal of sweeping up of leaves in 

the autumn, and a certain amount of bedding out of his own 
favourite plants, mainly asters and salvias - to 'make a nice show', 

as he put it, in summer. He was all in favour of syringeing roses for 

green-fly, but was slow to get around to it, and a demand for deep 

trenching for sweet peas was usually countered by the remark that 

you ought to see his own sweet peas! A proper treat last year, and 

no fancy stuff done beforehand.  

 

To be fair, he was attached to his employers, humoured their 

fancies in horticulture (so far as no actual hard work was involved) 

but vegetables he knew to be the real stuff of life; a nice Savoy, or a 

bit of curly kale; flowers were fancy stuff such as ladies liked to go 

in for, having nothing better to do with their time. He showed his 

affection by producing presents of the aforementioned asters, 

salvias, lobelia edging, and summer chrysanthemums.  

 



'Been doing some work at them new houses over at the 

Development. Want their gardens laid out nice, they do. More 
plants than they needed so I brought along a few, and I've put 'em in 

where them old-fashioned roses ain't looking so well.'  

 

Thinking of these things, Miss Marple averted her eyes from the 

garden, and picked up her knitting.  

 

One had to face the fact: St Mary Mead was not the place it had 

been. In a sense, of course, nothing was what it had been. You 

could blame the war (both the wars) or the younger generation, or 

women going out to work, or the atom bomb, or just the 

Government - but what one really meant was the simple fact that 

one was growing old. Miss Marple, who was a very sensible lady, 

knew that quite well. It was just that, in a queer way, she felt it more 
in St Mary Mead, because it had been her home for so long.  

 

St Mary Mead, the old world core of it, was still there. The Blue Boar 

was there, and the church and the vicarage and the little nest of 

Queen Anne and Georgian houses, of which hers was one. Miss 

Hartnell's house was still there, and also Miss Hartnell, fighting 

progress to the last gasp. Miss Wetherby had passed on and her 

house was now inhabited by the bank manager and his family, 

having been given a face-lift by the painting of doors and windows a 

bright royal blue. There were new people in most of the other old 

houses, but the houses themselves were little changed in 

appearances since the people who had bought them had done so 

because they liked what the house agent called 'old world charm'. 

They just added another bathroom, and spent a good deal of money 

on plumbing, electric cookers, and dishwashers.  



 

But though the houses looked much as before, the same could 
hardly be said of the village street. When shops changed hands 

there, it was with a view to immediate and intemperate 

modernization. The fishmonger was unrecognizable with new super 

windows behind which the refrigerated fish gleamed. The butcher 

had remained conservative - good meat is good meat, if you have 

the money to pay for it. If not, you take the cheaper cuts and the 

tough joints and like it! Barnes, the grocer, was still there, 

unchanged, for which Miss Harmell and Miss Marple and others 

daily thanked Heaven. So obliging, comfortable chairs to sit in by 

the counter, and cosy discussions as to cuts of bacon, and varieties 

of cheese. At the end of the street, however, where Mr Toms had 

once had his basket shop stood a glittering new supermarket - 

anathema to the elderly ladies of St Mary Mead.  
 

'Packets of things one's never even heard of,' exclaimed Miss 

Hartnell. 'All these great packets of breakfast cereal instead of 

cooking a child a proper breakfast of bacon and eggs. And you're 

expected to take a basket yourself and go round looking for things - 

it takes a quarter of an hour sometimes to find all one wants - and 

usually made up in inconvenient sizes, too much or too little. And 

then a long queue waiting to pay as you go out. Most tiring. Of 

course it's all very well for the people from the Development -'  

 

At this point she stopped.  

 

Because, as was now usual, the sentence came to an end there. 

The Development, Period, as they would say in modern terms. It 

had an entity of its own, and a capital letter. 



 

II 

 

Miss Marple uttered a sharp exclamation of annoyance. She'd 

dropped a stitch again. Not only that, she must have dropped it 

some time ago. Not until now, when she had to decrease for the 

neck and count the stitches, had she realized the fact. She took up 

a spare pin, held the knitting sideways to the light and peered 

anxiously. Even her new spectacles didn't seem to do any good. 

And that, she reflected, was because obviously there came a time 

when oculists, in spite of their luxurious waiting-rooms, the up-to-

date instruments, the bright lights they flashed into your eyes, and 

the very high fees they charged, couldn't do anything much more 

for you. Miss Marple reflected with some nostalgia on how good her 

eyesight had been a few (well, not perhaps a few) years ago. From 
the vantage-point of her garden, so admirably placed to see all that 

was going on in St Mary Mead, how little had escaped her noticing 

eye! And with the help of her bird glasses - (an interest in birds was 

so useful!) - she had been able to see - She broke off there and let 

her thoughts run back over the past. Ann Protheroe in her summer 

frock going along to the Vicarage garden. And Colonel Protheroe - 

poor man - a very tiresome and unpleasant man, to be sure - but to 

be murdered like that - She shook her head and went on to thoughts 

of Griselda, the vicar's pretty young wife. Dear Griselda - such a 

faithful friend - a Christmas card every year. That attractive baby of 

hers was a strapping young man now, and with a very good job. 

Engineering, was it? He always had enjoyed taking his mechanical 

trains to pieces. Beyond the Vicarage, there had been the stile and 



the field path with Farmer Giles's cattle beyond in the meadows 

where now - now...  
 

The Development.  

 

And why not? Miss Marple asked herself sternly. These things had 

to be. The houses were necessary, and they were very well built, or 

so she had been told. 'Planning,' or whatever they called it. Though 

why everything had to be called a Close she couldn't imagine. 

Aubrey Close and Longwood Close, and Grandison Close and all 

the rest of them. Not really Closes at all. Miss Marple knew what a 

Close was perfectly. Her uncle had been a Canon of Chichester 

Cathedral. As a child she had gone to stay with him in the Close.  

 

It was like Cherry Baker who always called Miss Marple's old-world 
overcrowded drawing-room the 'lounge'. Miss Marple corrected her 

gently, 'It's the drawing-room, Cherry.' And Cherry, because she 

was young and kind, endeavoured to remember, though it was 

obvious to her 'drawing-room' was a very funny word to use - and 

'lounge' came slipping out. She had of late, however, compromised 

on 'living-room'. Miss Marple liked Cherry very much. Her name was 

Mrs Baker and she came from the Development. She was one of the 

detachment of young wives who shopped at the supermarket and 

wheeled prams about the quiet streets of St Mary Mead. They were 

all smart and well turned out. Their hair was crisp and curled. They 

laughed and talked and called to one another. They were like a 

happy flock of birds. Owing to the insidious snares of Hire 

Purchase, they were always in need of ready money, though their 

husbands all earned good wages; and so they came and did 

housework or cooking. Cherry was a quick and efficient cook, she 



was an intelligent girl, took telephone calls correctly and was quick 

to spot inaccurades in the tradesmen's books. She was not much 
given to turning mattresses, and as far as washing up went Miss 

Marple always now passed the pantry door with her head turned 

away so as not to observe Cherry's method which was that of 

thrusting everything into the sink together and letting loose a 

snowstorm of detergent on it. Miss Marple had quietly removed her 

old Worcester teaset from daily circulation and put it in the corner 

cabinet whence it only emerged on special occasions. Instead she 

had purchased a modern service with a pattern of pale grey on 

white and no gilt on it whatsoever to be washed away in the sink.  

 

How different it had been in the past... Faithful Florence, for 

instance, that grenadier of a parlourmaid - and there had been Amy 

and Clara and Alice, those 'nice little maids' arriving from St Faith's 
Orphanage, to be 'trained', and then going on to better paid jobs 

elsewhere. Rather simple, some of them had been, and frequently 

adenoidal, and Amy distinctly moronic. They had gossiped and 

chattered with the other maids in the village and walked out with 

the fishmonger's assistant, or the under-gardener at the Hall, or 

one of Mr Barnes the grocer's numerous assistants. Miss Marple's 

mind went back over them affectionately thinking of all the little 

woolly coats she had knitted for their subsequent offspring. They 

had not been very good with the telephone, and no good at all at 

arithmetic. On the other hand, they knew how to wash up, and how 

to make a bed. They had had skills, rather than education. It was 

odd that nowadays it should be the educated girls who went in for 

all the domestic chores. Students from abroad, girls au pair, 

university students in the vacation, young married women like 



Cherry Baker, who lived in spurious Closes on new building 

developments.  
 

There were still, of course, people like Miss Knight. This last 

thought came suddenly as Miss Knight's tread overhead made the 

lustres on the mantelpiece tinkle warningly. Miss Knight had 

obviously had her afternoon rest and would now go out for her 

afternoon walk. In a moment she would come to ask Miss Marple if 

she could get her anything in the town. The thought of Miss Knight 

brought the usual reaction to Miss Marple's mind. Of course, it was 

very generous of dear Raymond (her nephew) and nobody could be 

kinder than Miss Knight, and of course that attack of bronchitis had 

left her very weak, and Dr Haydock had said very firmly that she 

must not go on sleeping alone in the house with only someone 

coming in daily, but - She stopped there. Because it was no use 
going on with the thought which was 'If only it could have been 

someone other than Miss Knight.' But there wasn't much choice for 

elderly ladies nowadays. Devoted maidservants had gone out of 

fashion. In real illness you could have a proper hospital nurse, at 

vast expense and procured with difficulty, or you could go to 

hospital. But after the critical phase of illness had passed, you were 

down to the Miss Knights.  

 

There wasn't, Miss Marple reflected, anything wrong about the Miss 

Knights other than the fact that they were madly irritating. They 

were full of kindness, ready to feel affection towards their charges, 

to humour them, to be bright and cheerful with them and in general 

to treat them as slightly mentally afflicted children.  

 



'But I,' said Miss Marple to herself, 'although I may be old, am not a 

mentally retarded child.'  
 

At this moment, breathing rather heavily, as was her custom, Miss 

Knight bounced brightly into the room. She was a big, rather flabby 

woman of fifty-six with yellowing grey hair very elaborately 

arranged, glasses, a long thin nose, and below it a good-natured 

mouth and a weak chin.  

 

'Here we are!' she exclaimed with a kind of beaming 

boisterousness, meant to cheer and enliven the sad twilight of the 

aged. 'I hope we've had our little snooze?'  

 

'I have been knitting,' Miss Marple replied, putting some emphasis 

on the pronoun, 'and,' she went on, confessing her weakness with 
distaste and shame, 'I've dropped a stitch.'  

 

'Oh dear, dear,' said Miss Knight. 'Well, we'll soon put that right, 

won't we?'  

 

'You will,' said Miss Marple. 'I, alas, am unable to do so.'  

 

The slight acerbity of her tone passed quite unnoticed. Miss Knight, 

as always, was eager to help.  

 

'There,' she said after a few moments. 'There you are, dear. Quite 

all right now.'  

 

Though Miss Marple was perfectly agreeable to be called 'dear' 

(and even 'ducks') by the woman at the greengrocer or the girl at 



the paper shop, it annoyed her intensely to be called 'dear' by Miss 

Knight. Another of those things that elderly ladies have to bear. She 
thanked Miss Knight politely.  

 

'And now I'm just going out for my wee toddle,' said Miss Knight 

humorously. 'Shan't be long.'  

 

'Please don't dream of hurrying back,' said Miss Marple politely and 

sincerely.  

 

'Well, I don't like to leave you too long on your own, dear, in case 

you get moped.'  

 

'I assure you I am quite happy,' said Miss Marple. 'I probably shall 

have' (she closed her eyes) 'a little nap.'  
 

'That's right, dear. Anything I can get you?'  

 

Miss Marple opened her eyes and considered.  

 

'You might go into Longdon's and see if the curtains are ready. And 

perhaps another skein of the blue wool from Mrs Wisley. And a box 

of blackcurrant lozenges at the chemist's. And change my book at 

the library - but don't let them give you anything that isn't on my list. 

This last one was too terrible. I couldn't read it.' She held out The 

Spring Awakens.  

 

'Oh dear dear! Didn't you like it? I thought you'd love it. Such a 

pretty story.'  

 



'And if it isn't too far for you, perhaps you wouldn't mind going as 

far as Halletts and see if they have one of those up-and-down egg 
whisks - not the turn-the-handle kind.'  

 

(She knew very well they had nothing of the kind, but Halletts was 

the farthest shop possible.)  

 

'If all this isn't too much -' she murmured.  

 

But Miss Knight replied with obvious sincerity.  

 

'Not at all. I shall be delighted.'  

 

Miss Knight loved shopping. It was the breath of life to her. One met 

acquaintances, and had the chance of a chat, one gossiped with 
the assistants, and had the opportunity of examining various 

articles in the various shops. And one could spend quite a long time 

engaged in these pleasant occupations without any guilty feeling 

that it was one's duty to hurry back.  

 

So Miss Knight started off happily, after a last glance at the frail old 

lady resting so peacefully by the window.  

 

After waiting a few minutes in case Miss Knight should return for a 

shopping bag, or her purse, or a handkerchief (she was a great 

forgetter and returner), and also to recover from the slight mental 

fatigue induced by thinking of so many unwanted things to ask Miss 

Knight to get, Miss Marple rose briskly to her feet, cast aside her 

knitting and strode purposefully across the room and into the hall. 

She took down her summer coat from its peg, a stick from the hall 



stand and exchanged her bedroom slippers for a pair of stout 

walking shoes. Then she left the house by the side door.  
 

'It will take her at least an hour and a half,' Miss Marple estimated to 

herself. 'Quite that - with all the people from the Development doing 

their shopping.'  

 

Miss Marple visualized Miss Knight at Longdon's making abortive 

inquiries re curtains. Her surmises were remarkably accurate. At 

this moment Miss Knight was exclaiming, 'Of course, I felt quite 

sure in my own mind they wouldn't be ready yet. But of course I said 

I'd come along and see when the old lady spoke about it. Poor old 

dears, they've got so little to look forward to. One must humour 

them. And she's a sweet old lady. Failing a little now, it's only to be 

expected - their faculties get dimmed. Now that's a pretty material 
you've got there. Do you have it in any other colours?'  

 

A pleasant twenty minutes passed. When Miss Knight had finally 

departed, the senior assistant remarked with a sniff, 'Failing, is 

she? I'll believe that when I see it for myself. Old Miss Marple has 

always been as sharp as a needle, and I'd say she still is.' She then 

gave her attention to a young woman in tight trousers and a sail-

cloth jersey who wanted plastic material with crabs on it for 

bathroom curtains.  

 

'Emily Waters, that's who she reminds me of,' Miss Marple was 

saying to herself, with the satisfaction it always gave her to match 

up a human personality with one known in the past. 'Just the same 

bird brain. Let me see, what happened to Emily?'  

 



Nothing much, was her conclusion. She had once nearly got 

engaged to a curate, but after an understanding of several years 
the affair had fizzled out. Miss Marple dismissed her nurse 

attendant from her mind and gave her attention to her 

surroundings. She had traversed the garden rapidly only observing 

as it were from the corner of her eye that Laycock had cut down the 

old-fashioned roses in a way more suitable to hybrid teas, but she 

did not allow this to distress her, or distract her from the delirious 

pleasure of having escaped for an outing entirely on her own. She 

had a happy feeling of adventure. She turned to the right, entered 

the Vicarage gate, took the path through the Vicarage garden and 

came out on the right of way. Where the stile had been there was 

now an iron swing gate giving on to a tarred asphalt path. This led 

to a neat little bridge over the stream and on the other side of the 

stream where once there had been meadows with cows, there was 
the Development. 

 

Chapter 2 

 

With the feeling of Columbus setting out to discover a new world, 

Miss Marple passed over the bridge, continued on to the path and 

within four minutes was actually in Aubrey Close.  

 

Of course Miss Marple had seen the Development from the Market 

Basing Road, that is, had seen from afar its Closes and rows of neat 

well-built houses, with their television masts and their blue and pink 

and yellow and green painted doors and windows. But until now it 

had only had the reality of a map, as it were. She had not been in it 



and of it. But now she was here, observing the brave new word that 

was springing up, the world that by all accounts was foreign to all 
she had known. It was like a neat model built with child's bricks. It 

hardly seemed real to Miss Marple.  

 

The people, too, looked unreal. The trousered young women, the 

rather sinister-looking young men and boys, the exuberant bosoms 

of the fifteen-year-old girls. Miss Marple couldn't help thinking that 

it all looked terribly depraved. Nobody noticed her much as she 

trudged along. She turned out of Aubrey Close and was presently in 

Darlington Close. She went slowly and as she went she listened 

avidly to the snippets of conversation between mothers wheeling 

prams, to the girls addressing young men, to the sinister-looking 

Teds (she supposed they were Teds) exchanging dark remarks with 

each other. Mothers came out on doorsteps calling to their children 
who, as usual, were busy doing all the things they had been told not 

to do. Children, Miss Marple reflected gratefully, never changed. 

And presently she began to smile, and noted down in her mind her 

usual series of recognitions.  

 

That woman is just like Carry Edwards - and the dark one is just like 

that Hooper girl - she'll make a mess of her marriage just like Mary 

Hooper did. Those boys - the dark one is just like Edward Leeke, a 

lot of wild talk but no harm in him - a nice boy really - the fair one is 

Mrs Bedwell's Josh all over again. Nice boys, both of them. The one 

like Gregory Binns won't do very well, I'm afraid. I expect he's got 

the same sort of mother...  

 

She turned a corner into Walsingham Close and her spirits rose 

every moment.  



 

The new world was the same as the old. The houses were different, 
the streets were called Closes, the clothes were different, the 

voices were different, but the human beings were the same as they 

always had been. And though using slightly different phraseology, 

the subjects of conversation were the same.  

 

By dint of turning corners in her exploration, Miss Marple had 

rather lost her sense of direction and had arrived at the edge of the 

housing estate again. She was now in Carrisbrook Close, half of 

which was still 'under construction'. At the first-floor window of a 

nearly finished house a young couple were standing. Their voices 

floated down as they discussed the amenities.  

 

'You must admit it's a nice position, Harry.'  
 

'Other one was just as good.'  

 

'This one's got two more rooms.'  

 

'And you've got to pay for them.'  

 

'Well, I like this one.'  

 

'You would!'  

 

'Ow, don't be such a spoil-sport. You know what Mum said.'  

 

'Your Mum never stops saying.'  

 



'Don't you say nothing against Mum. Where'd I have been without 

her? And she might have cut up nastier than she did. She could 
have taken you to court.'  

 

'Oh, come off it, Lily.'  

 

'It's a good view of the hills. You can almost see -' She leaned far 

out, twisting her body to the left. 'You can almost see the reservoir -

'  

 

She leant farther still, not realizing that she was resting her weight 

on loose boards that had been laid across the sill. They slipped 

under the pressure of her body, sliding outwards, carrying her with 

them. She screamed, trying to regain her balance.  

 
'Harry!'  

 

The young man stood motionless - a foot or two behind her. He took 

one step backwards -  

 

Desperately, clawing at the wall, the girl righted herself.  

 

'Oo!' She let out a frightened breath. 'I near as nothing fell out. Why 

didn't you get hold of me?'  

 

'It was all so quick. Anyway you're all right.'  

 

'That's all you know about it. I nearly went, I tell you. And look at the 

front of my jumper, it's all mussed.'  

 



Miss Marple went on a little way, then on impulse, she turned back.  

 
Lily was outside in the road waiting for the young man to lock up the 

house.  

 

Miss Marple went up to her and spoke rapidly in a low voice.  

 

'If I were you, my dear, I shouldn't marry that young man. You want 

someone whom you can rely upon if you're in danger. You must 

excuse me for saying this to you - but I feel you ought to be warned.'  

 

She turned away and Lily stared after her.  

 

'Well, of all the -'  

 
Her young man approached.  

 

'What was she saying to you, Lil?'  

 

Lily opened her mouth - then shut it again.  

 

'Giving me the gipsy's warning if you want to know.'  

 

She eyed him in a thoughtful manner.  

 

Miss Marple in her anxiety to get away quickly, turned a corner, 

stumbled over some loose stones and fell.  

 

A woman came running out of one of the houses.  

 



'Oh dear, what a nasty spill! I hope you haven't hurt yourself?'  

 
With almost excessive goodwill she put her arms round Miss Marple 

and tugged her to her feet.  

 

'No bones broken, I hope? There we are. I expect you feel rather 

shaken.'  

 

Her voice was loud and friendly. She was a plump squarely built 

woman of about forty, brown hair just turning grey, blue eyes, and a 

big generous mouth that seemed to Miss Marple's rather shaken 

gaze to be far too full of white shining teeth.  

 

'You'd better come inside and sit down and rest a bit. I'll make you a 

cup of tea.'  
 

Miss Marple thanked her. She allowed herself to be led through the 

blue-painted door and into a small room full of bright cretonne-

covered chairs and sofas.  

 

'There you are,' said her rescuer, establishing her on a cushioned 

arm-chair. 'You sit quiet and I'll put the kettle on.'  

 

She hurried out of the room which seemed rather restfully quiet 

after her departure. Miss Marple took a deep breath. She was not 

really hurt, but the fall had shaken her. Falls at her age were not to 

be encouraged. With luck, however, she thought guiltily, Miss 

Knight need never know. She moved her arms and legs gingerly. 

Nothing broken. If she could only get home all right. Perhaps, after 

a cup of tea -  



 

The cup of tea arrived almost as the thought came to her. Brought 
on a tray with four sweet biscuits on a little plate.  

 

'There you are.' It was placed on a small table in front of her. 'Shall I 

pour it out for you? Better have plenty of sugar.'  

 

'No sugar, thank you.'  

 

'You must have sugar. Shock, you know. I was abroad with 

ambulances during the war. Sugar's wonderful for shock.' She put 

four lumps in the cup and stirred vigorously. 'Now you get that 

down, and you'll feel as right as rain.'  

 

Miss Marple accepted the dictum.  
 

'A kind woman,' she thought. 'She reminds me of someone - now 

who is it?'  

 

'You've been very kind to me,' she said, smiling.  

 

'Oh, that's nothing. The little ministering angel, that's me. I love 

helping people.' She looked out of the window as the latch of the 

outer gate clicked. 'Here's my husband home. Arthur - we've got a 

visitor.'  

 

She went out into the hall and returned with Arthur who looked 

rather bewildered. He was a thin pale man, rather slow in speech.  

 



'This lady fell down - right outside our gate, so of course I brought 

her in.'  
 

'Your wife is very kind, Mr -'  

 

'Badcock's the name.'  

 

'Mr Badcock, I'm afraid I've given her a lot of trouble.'  

 

'Oh, no trouble to Heather. Heather enjoys doing things for people.' 

He looked at her curiously. 'Were you on your way anywhere in 

particular?'  

 

'No, I was just taking a walk. I live in St Mary Mead, the house 

beyond the Vicarage. My name is Marple.'  
 

'Well, I never!' exclaimed Heather. 'So you're Miss Marple. I've 

heard about you. You're the one who does all the murders.'  

 

'Heather! What do you -'  

 

'Oh, you know what I mean. Not actually do murders - find out about 

them. That's right, isn't it?'  

 

Miss Marple murmured modestly that she had been mixed in 

murders once or twice.  

 

'I heard there have been murders here, in this village. They were 

talking about it the other night at the Bingo Club. There was one at 



Gossington Hall. I wouldn't buy a place where there'd been a 

murder. I'd be sure it was haunted.'  
 

'The murder wasn't committed in Gossington Hall. A dead body was 

brought there.'  

 

'Found in the library on the hearthrug, that's what they said?'  

 

Miss Marple nodded.  

 

'Did you ever? Perhaps they're going to make a film of it. Perhaps 

that's why MarinaGregg  has bought Gossington Hall.'  

 

'MarinaGregg ?'  

 
'Yes. She and her husband. I forget his name - he's a producer, I 

think, or a director - JasonRudd something. But MarinaGregg , she's 

lovely, isn't she? Of course she hasn't been in so many pictures of 

late years - she was ill for a long time. But I still think there's never 

anybody like her. Did you see her in Carmenella. And The Price of 

Love, and Mary of Scotland? She's not so young any more, but she'll 

always be a wonderful actress. I've always been a terrific fan of 

hers. When I was a teenager I used to dream about her. The big 

thrill of my life was when there was a big show in aid of the St John 

Ambulance in Bermuda, and MarinaGregg  came to open it. I was 

mad with excitement, and then on the very day I went down with a 

temperature and the doctor said I couldn't go. But I wasn't going to 

be beaten. I didn't actually feel too bad. So I got up and put a lot of 

make-up on my face and went along. I was introduced to her and 



she talked to me for quite three minutes and gave me her 

autograph. It was wonderful. I've never forgotten that day.'  
 

Miss Marple stared at her.  

 

'I hope there were no - unfortunate after-effects?' she said 

anxiously.  

 

Heather Badcock laughed.  

 

'None at all. Never felt better. What I say is, if you want a thing 

you've got to take risks. I always do.'  

 

She laughed again, a happy strident laugh.  

 
Arthur Badcock said admiringly. 'There's never any holding 

Heather. She always gets away with things.'  

 

'Alison Wilde,' murmured Miss Marple, with a nod of satisfaction.  

 

'Pardon?' said Mr Badcock.  

 

'Nothing. Just someone I used to know.'  

 

Heather looked at her inquiringly.  

 

'You reminded me of her, that is all.'  

 

'Did I? I hope she was nice.'  

 



'She was very nice indeed,' said Miss Marple slowly. 'Kind, healthy, 

full of life.'  
 

'But she had her faults, I suppose?' laughed Heather. 'I have.'  

 

'Well, Alison always saw her own point of view so clearly that she 

didn't always see how things might appear to, or affect, other 

people.'  

 

'Like the time you took in that evacuated family from a condemned 

cottage and they went off with all our teaspoons,' Arthur said.  

 

'But Arthur! - I couldn't have turned them away. It wouldn't have 

been kind.'  

 
'They were family spoons,' said Mr Badcock sadly. 'Georgian. 

Belonged to my mother's grandmother.'  

 

'Oh, do forget those old spoons, Arthur. You do harp so.'  

 

'I'm not very good at forgetting, I'm afraid.'  

 

Miss Marple looked at him thoughtfully.  

 

'What's your friend doing now?' asked Heather of Miss Marple with 

kindly interest.  

 

Miss Marple paused a moment before answering.  

 

'Alison Wilde? Oh - she died.' 



 

Chapter 3 

 

'I'm glad to be back,' said Mrs Bantry. 'Although, of course, I've had 

a wonderful time.'  

 

Miss Marple nodded appreciatively, and accepted a cup of tea from 

her friend's hand.  

 

When her husband, Colonel Bantry, had died some years ago, Mrs 

Bantry had sold Gossington Hall and the considerable amount of 

land attached to it, retaining for herself what had been the East 

Lodge, a charming porticoed little building replete with 

inconvenience, where even a gardener had refused to live. Mrs 

Bantry had added to it the essentials of modern life, a built-on 
kitchen of the latest type, a new water supply from the main, 

electricity, and a bathroom. This had all cost her a great deal, but 

not nearly so much as an attempt to live at Gossington Hall would 

have done. She had also retained the essentials of privacy, about 

three quarters of an acre of garden nicely ringed with trees, so 

that, as she explained. 'Whatever they do with Gossington I shan't 

really see it or worry.'  

 

For the last few years she had spent a good deal of the year 

travelling about, visiting children and grandchildren in various 

parts of the globe, and coming back from time to time to enjoy the 

privacies of her own home. Gossington Hall itself had changed 

hands once or twice. It had been run as a guest house, failed, and 



been bought by four people who had shared it as four roughly 

divided flats and subsequently quarrelled. Finally the Ministry of 
Health had bought it for some obscure purpose for which they 

eventually did not want it. The Ministry had now resold it - and it 

was this sale which the two friends were discussing.  

 

'I have heard rumours, of course,' said Miss Marple.  

 

'Naturally,' said Mrs Bantry. 'It was even said that Charlie Chaplin 

and all his children were coming to live here. That would have been 

wonderful fun; unfortunately there isn't a word of truth in it. No, it's 

definitely MarinaGregg .'  

 

'How very lovely she was,' said Miss Marple with a sigh. 'I always 

remember those early films of hers. Bird of Passage with that 
handsome Joel Roberts. And the Mary, Queen of Scots film. And of 

course it was very sentimental, but I did enjoy Comin' thru the Rye. 

Oh dear, that was a long time ago.'  

 

'Yes,' said Mrs Bantry. 'She must be - what do you think? Forty-five? 

Fifty?'  

 

Miss Marple thought nearer fifty.  

 

'Has she been in anything lately? Of course I don't go very often to 

the cinema nowadays.'  

 

'Only small parts, I think,' said Mrs Bantry. 'She hasn't been a star 

for quite a long time. She had that bad nervous breakdown. After 

one of her divorces.'  



 

'Such a lot of husbands they all have,' said Miss Marple. 'It must 
really be quite tiring.'  

 

'It wouldn't suit me,' said Mrs Bantry. 'After you've fallen in love with 

a man and married him and got used to his ways and settled down 

comfortably - to go and throw it all up and start again! It seems to 

me madness.'  

 

'I can't presume to speak,' said Miss Marple with a little spinsterish 

cough, 'never having married. But it seems, you know, a pity.'  

 

'I suppose they can't help it really,' said Mrs Bantry vaguely. 'With 

the kind of lives they have to live. So public, you know. I met her,' 

she added. 'MarinaGregg , I mean, when I was in California.'  
 

'What was she like?' Miss Marple asked with interest.  

 

'Charming,' said Mrs Bantry. 'So natural and unspoiled.' She added 

thoughtfully, 'It's like a kind of livery really.'  

 

'What is?'  

 

'Being unspoiled and natural. You learn how to do it, and then you 

have to go on being it all the time. Just think of the hell of it - never 

to be able to chuck something, and say, "Oh, for the Lord's sake 

stop bothering me." I dare say that in sheer self-defence you have 

to have drunken parties or orgies.'  

 

'She's had five husbands, hasn't she?' Miss Marple asked.  



 

'At least. An early one that didn't count, and then a foreign Prince or 
Count, and then another film star, Robert Truscott, wasn't it? That 

was built up as a great romance. But it only lasted four years. And 

then Isidore Wright, the playwright. That was rather serious and 

quiet, and she had a baby apparently she'd always longed to have a 

child - she's even half-adopted a few strays - anyway this was the 

real thing. Very much built up. Motherhood with a capital M. And 

then, I believe, it was an imbecile, or queer or something - and it 

was after that, that she had this breakdown and started to take 

drugs and all that, and threw up her parts.'  

 

'You seem to know a lot about her,' said Miss Marple.  

 

'Well, naturally,' said Mrs Bantry. 'When she bought Gossington I 
was interested. She married the present man about two years ago, 

and they say she's quite all right again now. He's a producer - or do 

I mean a director? I always get mixed. He was in love with her when 

they were quite young, but he didn't mount to very much in those 

days. But now, I believe, he's got quite famous. What's his name 

now? JasonRudd , that's it. 

They've bought Gossington because it's handy for' - she hesitated - 

'Elstree?' she hazarded.  

 

Miss Marple shook her head.  

 

'I don't think so,' she said. 'Elstree's in North London.'  

 



'It's the fairly new studios. Hellingforth - that's it. Sounds so Finnish, 

I always think. About six miles from Market Basing. She's going to 
do a film on Elizabeth of Austria, I believe.'  

 

'What a lot you know,' said Miss Marple. 'About the private lives of 

film stars. Did you learn it all in California?'  

 

'Not really,' said Mrs Bantry. 'Actually I get it from the extraordinary 

magazines I read at my hairdresser's. Most of the stars I don't even 

know by name, but as I said because MarinaGregg  and her 

husband have bought Gossington, I was interested. Really the 

things those magazines say! I don't suppose half of it is true - 

probably not a quarter. I don't believe MarinaGregg  is a 

nymphomaniac, I don't think she drinks, probably she doesn't even 

take drugs, and quite likely she just went away to have a nice rest 
and didn't have a nervous breakdown at all! - but it's true that she is 

coming here to live.'  

 

'Next week, I heard,' said Miss Marple.  

 

'As soon as that? I know she's lending Gossington for a big fкte on 

the twenty-third in aid of the St John Ambulance Corps. I suppose 

they've done a lot to the house?'  

 

'Practically everything,' said Miss Marple. 'Really it would have 

been much simpler, and probably cheaper, to have pulled it down 

and built a new house.'  

 

'Bathrooms, I suppose?'  

 



'Six new ones, I hear. And a palm court. And a pool. And what I 

believe they call picture windows, and they've knocked your 
husband's study and the library into one to make a music room.'  

 

'Arthur will turn in his grave. You know how he hated music. Tone 

deaf, poor dear. His face, when some kind friend took us to the 

opera! He'll probably come back and haunt them.' She stopped and 

then said abruptly. 'Does anyone ever hint that Gossington might be 

haunted?'  

 

Miss Marple shook her head.  

 

'It isn't,' she said with certainty.  

 

'That wouldn't prevent people saying it was,' Mrs Bantry pointed 
out.  

 

'Nobody ever has said so.' Miss Marple paused and the said. 

'People aren't really foolish, you know. Not in villages.'  

 

Mrs Bantry shot her a quick look. 'You've always stuck to that, . 

And I won't say that you're not right.'  

 

She suddenly smiled.  

 

'MarinaGregg  asked me, very sweetly and delicately, if I wouldn't 

find it very painful to see my old home occupied by strangers. I 

assured her that it wouldn't hurt me at all. I don't think she quite 

believed me. But after all, as you know, Marple, Gossington wasn't 

our home. We weren't brought up there as children - that's what 



really counts. It was just a house with a nice bit of shooting and 

fishing attached, that we bought when Arthur retired. We thought of 
it, I remember, as a house that would be nice and easy to run! How 

we can ever have thought that, I can't imagine! All those staircases 

and passages. Only four servants! Only! Those were the days, ha 

ha!' She added suddenly: 'What's all this about your falling down? 

That Knight woman ought not to let you go out by yourself.'  

 

'It wasn't poor Miss Knight's fault. I gave her a lot of shopping to do 

and then I -'  

 

'Deliberately gave her the slip? I see. Well, you shouldn't do it, Marple. 

Not at your age.'  

 

'How did you hear about it?'  
 

Mrs Bantry grinned.  

 

'You can't keep any secrets in St Mary Mead. You've often told me 

so. Mrs Meavy told me.'  

 

'Mrs Meavy?' Miss Marple looked at sea.  

 

'She comes in daily. She's from the Development.'  

 

'Oh, the Development.' The usual pause happened.  

 

'What were you doing in the Development?' asked Mrs Bantry, 

curiously.  

 



'I just wanted to see it. To see what the people were like.'  

 
'And what did you think they were like?'  

 

'Just the same as everyone else. I don't quite know if that was 

disappointing or reassuring.'  

 

'Disappointing, I should think.'  

 

'No. I think it's reassuring. It makes you - well - recognize certain 

types - so that when anything occurs - one will understand quite 

well why and for what reason.'  

 

'Murder, do you mean?'  

 
Miss Marple looked shocked.  

 

'I don't know why you should assume that I think of murder all the 

time.'  

 

'Nonsense, Marple. Why don't you come out boldly and call yourself a 

criminologist and have done with it?'  

 

'Because I am nothing of the sort,' said Miss Marple with spirit. 'It is 

simply that I have a certain knowledge of human nature - that is only 

natural after having lived in a small village all my life.'  

 

'You probably have something there,' said Mrs Bantry thoughtfully, 

'though most people wouldn't agree, of course. Your nephew 

Raymond always used to say this place was a complete backwater.'  



 

'Dear Raymond,' said Miss Marple indulgently. She added: 'He's 
always been so kind. He's paying for Miss Knight, you know.'  

 

The thought of Miss Knight induced a new train of thought and she 

arose and said: 'I'd better be going back now, I suppose.'  

 

'You didn't walk all the way here, did you?'  

 

'Of course not. I came in Inch.'  

 

This somewhat enigmatic pronouncement was received with 

complete understanding. In days very long past, Mr Inch had been 

the proprietor of two cabs, which met trains at the local station and 

which were also hired by the local ladies to take them 'calling', out 
to tea parties, and occasionally, with their daughters, to such 

frivolous entertainments as dances. In the fulness of time Inch, a 

cheery red-faced man of seventy-odd, gave place to his son - 

known as 'young Inch' (he was then aged forty-five) though old Inch 

still continued to drive such elderly ladies as considered his son too 

young and irresponsible. To keep up with the times, young Inch 

abandoned horse vehicles for motor cars. He was not very good 

with machinery and in due course a certain Mr Bardwell took over 

from him. The name Inch persisted. Mr Bardwell in due course sold 

out to Mr Roberts, but in the telephone book Inch's Taxi Service 

was still the official name, and the older ladies of the community 

continued to refer to their journeys as going somewhere 'in Inch', 

as though they were Jonah and Inch was a whale. 

 



II 

 

'Dr Haydock called,' said Miss Knight reproachfully. 'I told him you'd 

gone to tea with Mrs Bantry. He said he'd call in again tomorrow.'  

 

She helped Miss Marple off with her wraps.  

 

'And now, I expect, we're tired out,' she said accusingly.  

 

'You may be,' said Miss Marple. 'I am not.'  

 

'You come and sit cosy by the fire,' said Miss Knight, as usual 

paying no attention. ('You don't need to take much notice of what 

the old dears say. I just humour them.') 'And how would we fancy a 

nice cup of Ovaltine? Or Horlicks for a change?'  
 

Miss Marple thanked her and said she would like a small glass of 

dry sherry. Miss Knight looked disapproving.  

 

'I don't know what the doctor would say to that, I'm sure,' she said, 

when she returned with the glass.  

 

'We will make a point of asking him tomorrow morning,' said Miss 

Marple.  

 

On the following morning Miss Knight met Dr Haydock in the hall, 

and did some agitated whispering.  

 



The elderly doctor came into the room rubbing his hands, for it was 

a chilly morning.  
 

'Here's our doctor to see us,' said Miss Knight gaily. 'Can I take your 

gloves, Doctor?'  

 

'They'll be all right here,' said Haydock, casting them carelessly on 

a table. 'Quite a nippy morning.'  

 

'A little glass of sherry perhaps?' suggested Miss Marple.  

 

'I heard you were taking to drink. Well, you should never drink 

alone.'  

 

The decanter and the glasses were already on a small table by Miss 
Marple. Miss Knight left the room.  

 

Dr Haydock was a very old friend. He had semi-retired, but came to 

attend certain of his old patients.  

 

'I hear you've been falling about,' he said as he finished his glass. 'It 

won't do, you know, not at your age. I'm warning you. And I hear 

you didn't want to send for Sandford.'  

 

Sandford was Haydock's partner.  

 

'That Miss Knight of yours sent for him anyway - and she was quite 

right.'  

 



'I was only bruised and shaken a little. Dr Sandford said so. I could 

have waited quite well until you were back.'  
 

'Now look here, my dear. I can't go on for ever. And Sandford, let 

me tell you, has better qualifications them I have. He's a first class 

man.'  

 

'The younger doctors are all the same,' said Miss Marple. 'They take 

your blood pressure, and whatever's the matter with you, you get 

some kind of mass produced variety of new pills. Pink ones, yellow 

ones, brown ones. Medicine nowadays is just like a supermarket - 

all packaged up.'  

 

'Serve you right if I prescribed leeches, and black draught, and 

rubbed your chest with camphorated oil.'  
 

'I do that myself when I've got a cough,' said Miss Marple with spirit, 

'and very comforting it is.'  

 

'We don't like getting old, that's what it is,' said Haydock gently. 'I 

hate it.'  

 

'You're quite a young man compared to me,' said Miss Marple. 'And 

I don't really mind getting old - not that in itself. It's the lesser 

indignities.'  

 

'I think I know what you mean.'  

 

'Never being alone! The difficulty of getting out for a few minutes by 

oneself. And even my knitting - such a comfort that has always 



been, and I really am a good knitter. Now I drop stitches all the time 

- and quite often I don't even know I dropped them.'  
 

Haydock looked at her thoughtfully.  

 

Then his eyes twinkled.  

 

'There's always the opposite.'  

 

'Now what do you mean by that?'  

 

'If you can't knit, what about unravelling for a change? Penelope 

did.'  

 

'I'm hardly in her position.'  
 

'But unravelling's rather in your line, isn't it?'  

 

He rose to his feet.  

 

'I must be getting along. What I'd prescribe for you is a nice juicy 

murder.'  

 

'That's an outrageous thing to say!'  

 

'Isn't it? However, you can always make do with the depth the 

parsley sank into the butter on a summer's day. I always wondered 

about that. Good old Holmes. A period piece, nowadays, I suppose. 

But he'll never be forgotten.'  

 



Miss Knight bustled in after the doctor had gone.  

 
'There,' he said, 'we look much more cheerful. Did the doctor 

recommend a tonic?'  

 

'He recommended me to take an interest in murder.'  

 

'A nice detective story?'  

 

'No,' said Miss Marple. 'Real life.'  

 

'Goodness,' exclaimed Miss Knight. 'But there's not likely to be a 

murder in this quiet spot.'  

 

'Murders,' said Miss Marple, 'can happen anywhere. And do.'  
 

'At the Development, perhaps?' mused Miss Knight. 'A lot of those 

Teddy-looking boys carry knives.'  

 

But the murder, when it came, was not at the Development. 

 

Chapter 4 

 

Mrs Bantry stepped back a foot or two, surveyed herself in the 

glass, made a slight adjustment to her hat (she was not used to 

wearing hats), drew on a pair of good quality leather gloves and left 

the lodge, closing the door carefully behind her. She had the most 

pleasurable anticipations of what lay in front of her. Some three 



weeks had passed since her talk with Miss Marple. MarinaGregg  

and her husband had arrived at Gossington Hall and were now 
more or less installed there.  

 

There was to be a meeting there this afternoon of the main persons 

involved in the arrangements for the fкte in aid of the St John 

Ambulance. Mrs Bantry was not among those on the committee, but 

she had received a note from MarinaGregg  asking her to come and 

have tea beforehand. It had recalled their meeting in California and 

had been signed, 'Cordially, MarinaGregg .' It had been 

handwritten, not typewritten. There is no denying that Mrs Bantry 

was both pleased and flattered. After all, a celebrated film star is a 

celebrated film star and elderly ladies, though they may be of local 

importance, are aware of their complete unimportance in the world 

of celebrities. So Mrs Bantry had the pleased feeling of a child for 
whom a special treat had been arranged.  

 

As she walked up the drive Mrs Bantry's keen eyes went from side 

to side registering her impressions. The place had been smartened 

up since the days when it had passed from hand to hand. 'No 

expense spared,' said Mrs Bantry to herself, nodding in 

satisfaction. The drive afforded no view of the flower garden and 

for that Mrs Bantry was just as pleased. The flower garden and its 

special herbaceous border had been her own particular delight in 

the far-off days when she had lived at Gossington Hall. She 

permitted regretful and nostalgic memories of her irises. The best 

iris garden of any in the country, she told herself with a fierce pride.  

 

Faced by a new front door in a blaze of new paint she pressed the 

bell. The door was opened with gratifying promptness by what was 



undeniably an Italian butler. She was ushered by him straight to the 

room which had been Colonel Bantry's library. This, as she had 
already heard, had been thrown into one with the study. The result 

was impressive. The walls were panelled, the floor was parquet. At 

one end was a grand piano and halfway along the wall was a superb 

record player. At the other end of the room was a small island, as it 

were, which comprised Persian rugs, a tea-table and some chairs. 

By the tea-table sat MarinaGregg , and leaning against the 

mantelpiece was what Mrs Bantry at first thought to be the ugliest 

man she had ever seen.  

 

Just a few moments previously when Mrs Bantry's hand had been 

advanced to press the bell, MarinaGregg  had been saying in a soft, 

enthusiastic voice, to her husband:  

 
'This place is right for me, Jinks, just right. It's what I've always 

wanted. Quiet. English quiet and the English countryside. I can see 

myself living here, living here all my life if need be. And we'll adopt 

the English way of life. We'll have afternoon tea every afternoon 

with China tea and my lovely Georgian tea service. And we'll look 

out of the window on those lawns and that English herbaceous 

border. I've come home at last, that's what I feel. I feel that I can 

settle down here, that I can be quiet and happy. It's going to be 

home, this place. That's what I feel. Home.'  

 

And JasonRudd(known to his wife as Jinks) had smiled at her. It 

was an acquiescent smile, indulgent, but it held its reserve 

because, after all, he had heard it very often before. Perhaps this 

time it would be true. Perhaps this was the place that MarinaGregg  

might feel at home. But he knew her early enthusiasms so well. She 



was always so sure that at last she had found exactly what she 

wanted. He said in his deep voice:  
 

'That's grand, honey. That's just grand. I'm glad you like it.'  

 

'Like it? I adore it. Don't you adore it too?'  

 

'Sure,' said JasonRudd. 'Sure.'  

 

It wasn't too bad, he reflected to himself. Good, solidly built, rather 

ugly Victorian. It had, he admitted, a feeling of solidity and security. 

Now that the worst of its fantastic inconveniences had been ironed 

out, it would be quite reasonably comfortable to live in. Not a bad 

place to come back to from time to time. With luck, he thought, 

MarinaGregg wouldn't start taking a dislike to it for perhaps two years to 
two years and a half. It all depended.  

 

MarinaGregg said, sighing softly:  

 

'It's so wonderful to feel well again. Well and strong. Able to cope 

with things.'  

 

And he said again: 'Sure, honey, sure.'  

 

And it was at that moment that the door opened and the Italian 

butler had ushered in Mrs Bantry.  

 

MarinaGregg 's welcome was all that was charming. She came 

forward, hands outstretched, saying how delightful it was to meet 

Mrs Bantry again. And what a coincidence that they should have 



met that time in San Francisco and that two yeats later she and 

Jinks should actually buy the house that had once belonged to Mrs 
Bantry. And she did hope, she really did hope that Mrs Bantry 

wouldn't mind terribly the way they'd pulled the house about and 

done things to it and she hoped she wouldn't feel that they were 

terrible intruders living here.  

 

'Your coming to live here is one of the most exciting things that has 

ever happened to this place,' said Mrs Bantry cheerfully and she 

looked towards the mantelpiece. Whereupon, almost as an after-

thought, MarinaGregg  said:  

 

'You don't know my husband, do you? JasonRudd, this is Mrs Bantry.'  

 

Mrs Bantry looked at JasonRudd with some interest. Her first 
impression that this was one of the ugliest men she had ever seen 

became qualified. He had interesting eyes. They were, she thought, 

more deeply sunk in his head than any eyes she had seen. Deep 

quiet pools, said Mrs Bantry to herself, and felt like a romantic lady 

novelist. The rest of his face was distinctly craggy, almost 

ludicrously out of proportion. His nose jutted upwards and a little 

red paint would have transformed it into the nose of a clown very 

easily. He had, too, a clown's big sad mouth. Whether he was at this 

moment in a furious temper or whether he always looked as though 

he were in a furious temper she did not quite know. His voice when 

he spoke was unexpectedly pleasant. Deep and slow.  

 

'A husband,' he said, 'is always an afterthought. But let me say with 

my wife that we're very glad to welcome you here. I hope you don't 

feel that it ought to be the other way about.'  



 

'You must get it out of your head,' said Mrs Bantry, 'that I've been 
driven forth from my old home. It never was my old home. I've been 

congratulating myself ever since I sold it. It was a most 

inconvenient house to run. I liked the garden but the house became 

more and more of a worry. I've had a perfectly splendid time ever 

since travelling abroad and going and seeing my married daughters 

and my grandchildren and my friends in all different parts of the 

world.'  

 

'Daughters,' said MarinaGregg , 'You have daughters and sons?'  

 

'Two sons and two daughters,' said Mrs Bantry, 'and pretty widely 

spaced. One in Kenya, one in South Africa. One near Texas and the 

other, thank goodness, in London.'  
 

'Four,' said MarinaGregg . 'Four, and grandchildren?'  

 

'Nine up to date,' said Mrs Bantry. 'It's great fun being a 

grandmother. You don't have any if the worry of parental 

responsibility. You can spoil them in the most unbridled way -'  

 

JasonRudd interrupted her. 'I'm afraid the sun catches your eyes, 

he said, and went to a window to adjust the blind. 'You must tell us 

all about this delightful village,' he said as he came back.  

 

He handed her a cup of tea. 'Will you have a hot scone or a 

sandwich or this cake? We have an Italian cook and she makes 

quite good pastry and cakes. You see we have quite taken to your 

English afternoon tea.'  



 

'Delicious tea too,' said Mrs Bantry, sipping the fragrant beverage.  
 

MarinaGregg  smiled and looked pleased. The sudden nervous 

movement of her fingers which JasonRudd's eyes had noticed a 

minute or two previously, was stilled again. Mrs Bantry looked at 

her hostess with great admiration. MarinaGregg 's heyday had 

been before the rise to supreme importance of vital statistics. She 

could not have been described as Sex Incarnate, or 'The Bust' or 

'The Torso.' She had been long and slim and willowy. The bones of 

her face and head had had some of the beauty associated with 

those of Garbo. She had brought personality to her pictures rather 

than mere sex. The sudden turn of her head, the opening of the 

deep lovely eyes, the faint quiver of her mouth, all these were what 

brought to one suddenly that feeling of breath-taking loveliness that 
comes not from regularity of feature but from sudden magic of the 

flesh that catches the onlooker unawares. She still had this quality 

though it was not now so easily apparent. Like many film and stage 

actresses she had what seemed to be a habit of turning off 

personality at will. She could retire into herself, be quiet, gentle, 

aloof, disappointing to an eager fan. And then suddenly the turn of 

the head, the movement of the hands, the sudden smile and the 

magic was there.  

 

One of her greatest pictures had been Mary, Queen of Scots, and it 

was of her performance in that picture that Mrs Bantry was 

reminded now as she watched her. Mrs Bantry's eye switched to 

the husband. He too was watching MarinaGregg. Off guard for a moment, 

his face expressed clearly his feelings. 'Good Lord,' said Mrs Bantry 

to herself, 'the man adores her.'  



 

She didn't know why she should feel so surprised. Perhaps because 
film stars and their love affairs and their devotion were so written 

up in the Press, that one never expected to see the real thing with 

one's own eyes. On an impulse she said:  

 

'I do hope you'll enjoy it here and that you'll be able to stay here 

some time. Do you expect to have the house for long?'  

 

MarinaGregg opened wide surprised eyes as she turned her head. 'I want 

to stay here always,' she said. 'Oh, I don't mean that I shan't have to 

go away a lot. I shall, of course. There's possibility of making a film 

in North Africa next year although nothing's settled yet. No, but this 

will be my home. I shall come back here. I shall always be able to 

come back here.' She sighed. 'That's what's so wonderful. To have 
found a home at last.'  

 

'I see,' said Mrs Bantry, but at the same time she thought to herself, 

'All the same I don't believe for a moment that it will be like that. I 

don't believe you're the kind that can ever settle down.'  

 

Again she shot a quick surreptitious glance at JasonRudd. He was 

not scowling now. Instead he was smiling, a sudden very sweet and 

unexpected smile, but it was a sad smile. 'He knows it too,' thought 

Mrs Bantry.  

 

The door opened and a woman came in. 'Bartletts want you on the 

telephone, JasonRudd,' she said.  

 

'Tell them to call back.'  



 

'They said it was urgent.'  
 

He sighed and rose. 'Let me introduce you to Mrs Bantry,' he said. 

'Ella Zielinsky, my secretary.'  

 

'Have a cup of tea, Ella,' said MarinaGregg as Ella Zielinsky acknowledged 

the introduction with a smiling 'pleased to meet you.'  

 

'I'll have a sandwich,' said Ella. 'I don't go for China tea.'  

 

Ella Zielinsky was, at a guess, thirty-five. She wore a well cut suit, a 

ruffled blouse and appeared to breathe self-confidence. She had 

short-cut black hair and a wide forehead.  

 
'You used to live here, so they tell me,' she said to Mrs Bantry.  

 

'It's a good many years ago now,' said Mrs Bantry. 'After my 

husband's death I sold it and it's passed through several hands 

since then.'  

 

'Mrs Bantry really says she doesn't hate the things we've done to it,' 

said MarinaGregg.  

 

'I should be frightfully disappointed if you hadn't,' said Mrs Bantry. 'I 

came up here all agog. I can tell you the most splendid rumours 

have been going around the village.'  

 



'Never knew how difficult it was to get hold of plumbers in this 

country,' said Miss Zielinsky, champing a sandwich in a 
businesslike way. 'Not that that's been really my job,' she went on.  

 

'Everything is your job,' said MarinaGregg, 'and you know it is, Ella. The 

domestic staff and the plumbing and arguing with the builders.'  

 

'They don't seem ever to have heard of a picture window in this 

country.'  

 

Ella looked towards the window. 'It's a nice view, I must admit.'  

 

'A lovely old-fashioned rural English scene,' said MarinaGregg. 'This 

house has got atmosphere.'  

 
'It wouldn't look so rural if it wasn't for the trees,' said Ella Zielinsky. 

'That housing estate down there grows while you look at it.'  

 

'That's new since my time,' said Mrs Bantry.  

 

'You mean there was nothing but the village when you lived here?'  

 

Mrs Bantry nodded.  

 

'It must have been hard to do your shopping.'  

 

'I don't think so,' said Mrs Bantry. 'I think it was frightfully easy.'  

 



'I understand having a flower garden,' said Ella Zielinsky, 'but you 

folk over here seem to grow all your vegetables as well. Wouldn't it 
be much easier to buy them - there's a supermarket?'  

 

'It's probably coming to that,' said Mrs Bantry, with a sigh. 'They 

don't taste the same, though.'  

 

'Don't spoil the atmosphere, Ella,' said MarinaGregg.  

 

The door opened and JasonRudd looked in. 'Darling,' he said to MarinaGregg, 'I 

hate to bother you but would you mind? They just want your private 

view about this.'  

 

MarinaGregg sighed and rose. She trailed languidly towards the door. 

'Always something,' she murmured. 'I'm so sorry, Mrs Bantry. I 
don't really think that this will take longer than a minute or two.'  

 

'Atmosphere,' said Ella Zielinsky, as MarinaGregg went out and closed the 

door. 'Do you think the house has got atmosphere?'  

 

'I can't say I ever thought of it that way,' said Mrs Bantry. 'It was just 

a house. Rather inconvenient in some ways and very nice and cosy 

in other ways.'  

 

'That's what I should have thought,' said Ella Zielinsky. She cast a 

quick direct look at Mrs Bantry. 'Talking of atmosphere, when did 

the murder take place here?'  

 

'No murder ever took place here,' said Mrs Bantry.  

 



'Oh come now. The stories I've heard. There are always stories, Mrs 

Bantry. On the hearthrug, right there, wasn't it?' said Miss Zielinsky 
nodding towards the fireplace.  

 

'Yes,' said Mrs Bantry. 'That was the place.'  

 

'So there was a murder?'  

 

Mrs Bantry shook her head. 'The murder didn't take place here. The 

girl who had been killed was brought here and planted in this room. 

She'd nothing to do with us.'  

 

Miss Zielinsky looked interested.  

 

'Possibly you had a bit of difficulty making people believe that?' she 
remarked.  

 

'You're quite right there,' said Mrs Bantry.  

 

'When did you find it?'  

 

'The housemaid came in in the morning,' said Mrs Bantry, 'with 

early morning tea. We had housemaids then, you know.'  

 

'I know,' said Miss Zielinksy, 'wearing print dresses that rustled.'  

 

'I'm not sure about the print dress,' said Mrs Bantry, 'it may have 

been overalls by then. At any rate, she burst in and said there was a 

body in the library. I said "nonsense", then I woke up my husband 

and we came down to see.'  



 

'And there it was,' said Miss Zielinsky. 'My, the way things happen.' 
She turned her head sharply towards the door and then back again. 

'Don't talk about it to Miss MarinaGregg, if you don't mind,' she said. 'It's 

not good for her, that sort of thing.'  

 

'Of course. I won't say a word,' said Mrs Bantry. 'I never do talk 

about it, as a matter of fact. It all happened so long ago. But won't 

she - Miss MarinaGregg I mean - won't she hear it anyway?'  

 

'She doesn't come very much in contact with reality,' said Ella 

Zielinsky. 'Film stars can lead a fairly insulated life, you know. In 

fact very often one has to take care that they do. Things upset 

them. Things upset her. She's been seriously ill the last year or two, 

you know. She only started making a come-back a year ago.'  
 

'She seems to like the house,' said Mrs Bantry, 'and to feel she will 

be happy here.'  

 

'I expect it'll last a year or two,' said Ella Zielinsky.  

 

'Not longer than that?'  

 

'Well, I rather doubt it. MarinaGregg is one of those people, you know, 

who are always thinking they've found their heart's desire. But life 

isn't as easy as that, is it?'  

 

'No,' said Mrs Bantry forcefully, 'it isn't.'  

 



'It'll mean a lot to him if she's happy here,' said Miss Zielinsky. She 

ate two more sandwiches in an absorbed, rather gobbling fashion 
in the manner of one who crams food into themselves as though 

they had an important train to catch. 'He's a genius, you know,' she 

went on. 'Have you seen any of the pictures he's directed?'  

 

Mrs Bantry felt slightly embarrassed. She was of the type of woman 

who when she went to the cinema went entirely for the picture. The 

long lists of casts, directors, producers, photography and the rest 

of it passed her by. Very frequently, indeed, she did not even notice 

the names of the stars. She was not, however, anxious to call 

attention to this failing on her part.  

 

'I get mixed up,' she said.  

 
'Of course he's got a lot to contend with,' said Ella Zielinsky. 'He's 

got her as well as everything else and she's not easy. You've got to 

keep her happy, you see; and it's not really easy, I suppose, to keep 

people happy. Unless - that is - they - they are -' she hesitated.  

 

'Unless they're the happy kind,' suggested Mrs Bantry, 'Some 

people,' she added thoughtfully, 'enjoy being miserable.'  

 

'Oh, MarinaGregg isn't like that,' said Ella Zielinsky, shaking her head. 'It's 

more that her ups and downs are so violent. You know - far too 

happy one moment, far too pleased with everything and delighted 

with everything and how wonderful she feels. Then of course some 

little thing happens and down she goes to the opposite extreme.'  

 

'I suppose that's temperament,' said Mrs Bantry vaguely.  



 

'That's right,' said Ella Zielinsky. 'Temperament. They've all got it, 
more or less, but MarinaGregg  has got it more than most people. 

Don't we know it! The stories I could tell you!' She ate the last 

sandwich. 'Thank God I'm only the social secretary.' 

 

Chapter 5 

 

The throwing open of the grounds of Gossington Hall for the benefit 

of the St John Ambulance Association was attended by a quite 

unprecedented number of people. Shilling admission fees mounted 

up in a highly satisfactory fashion. For one thing, the weather was 

good, a clear sunny day. But the preponderant attraction was 

undoubtedly the enormous local curiosity to know exactly what 

these 'film people' had done to Gossington Hall. The most 
extravagant assumptions were entertained. The swimming pool in 

particular caused immense satisfaction. Most people's ideas of 

Hollywood stars were of sun-bathing by a pool in exotic 

surroundings and in exotic company. That the climate of Hollywood 

might be more suited to swimming pools than that of St Mary Mead 

failed to be considered. After all, England always has one fine hot 

week in the summer and there is always one day that the Sunday 

papers publish articles on How to Keep Cool, How to Have Cool 

Suppers and How to Make Cool Drinks. The pool was almost exactly 

what everyone had imagined it might be. It was large, its waters 

were blue, it had a kind of exotic pavilion for changing and was 

surrounded with a highly artificial plantation of hedges and shrubs. 



The reactions of the multitude were exactly as might have been 

expected and hovered over a wide range of remarks.  
 

'O-oh, isn't it lovely!'  

 

'Two penn'orth of splash here, all right?  

 

'Reminds me of that holiday camp I went to.'  

 

'Wicked luxury I call it. It oughtn't to be allowed.'  

 

'Look at all that fancy marble. It must have cost the earth!'  

 

'Don't see why these people think they can come over here and 

spend all the money they like.'  
 

'Perhaps this'Il be on the telly sometime. That'll be fun.'  

 

Even Mr Sampson, the oldest man in St Mary Mead, boasting 

proudly of being ninety-six though his relations insisted firmly that 

he was only eighty-six, had staggered along supporting his 

rheumatic legs with a stick, to see this excitement. He gave it his 

highest praise: 'Ah, there'll be a lot of wickedness here, I don't 

doubt. Naked men and women drinking and smoking what they call 

in the papers them reefers. There'll be all that, I expect. Ah yes,' 

said Mr Sampson with enormous pleasure, 'there'll be a lot of 

wickedness.'  

 

It was felt that the final seal of approval had been set on the 

afternoon's entertainment. For an extra shilling people were 



allowed to go into the house, and study the new music room, the 

drawing-room, the completely unrecognizable dining-room, now 
done in dark oak and Spanish leather, and a few other joys.  

 

'Never think this was Gossington Hall, would you, now?' said Mr 

Sampson's daughter-in-law.  

 

Mrs Bantry strolled up fairly late and observed with pleasure that 

the money was coming in well and that the attendance was 

phenomenal.  

 

The large marquee in which tea was being served was jammed with 

people. Mrs Bantry hoped the buns were going to go round. There 

seemed some very competent women, however, in charge. She 

herself made a bee-line for the herbaceous border and regarded it 
with a jealous eye. No expense had been spared on the herbacous 

border, she was glad to note, and it was a proper herbaceous 

border, well planned and arranged and expensively stocked. No 

personal labours had gone into it, she was sure of that. Some good 

gardening firm had been given the contract, no doubt. But aided by 

carte blanche and the weather, they had turned out a very good 

job.  

 

Looking round her, she felt there was a faint flavour of a 

Buckingham Palace garden party about the scene. Everybody was 

craning to see all they could see, and from time to time a chosen 

few were led into one of the more secret recesses of the house. She 

herself was presently approached by a willowy young man with 

long wavy hair.  

 



'Mrs Bantry? You are Mrs Bantry?'  

 
'I'm Mrs Bantry, yes.'  

 

'Hailey Preston.' He shook hands with her. 'I work for Mr Rudd. Will 

you come up to the second floor? Mr and Mrs Rudd are asking a few 

special friends up there.'  

 

Duly honoured Mrs Bantry followed him. They went in through what 

had been called in her time the garden door. A red cord cordoned 

off the bottom of the main stairs. Hailey Preston unhooked it and 

she passed through. Just in front of her Mrs Bantry observed 

Councillor and Mrs Allcock. The latter who was stout was breathing 

heavily.  

 
'Wonderful what they've done, isn't it, Mrs Bantry?' panted Mrs 

Allcock. 'I'd like to have a look at the bathrooms, I must say, but I 

suppose I shan't get the chance.' Her voice was wistful.  

 

At the top of the stairs MarinaGregg  and JasonRudd were 

receiving this specially chosen йlite. What had once been a spare 

bedroom had been thrown into the landing so as to make a wide 

lounge-like effect. Giuseppe the butler was officiating with drinks.  

 

A stout man in livery was announcing guests.  

 

'Councillor and Mrs Allcock,' he boomed.  

 

MarinaGregg  was being, as Mrs Bantry had described her to Miss 

Marple, completely natural and charming. She could already hear 



Mrs Allcock saying later: '- and so unspoiled, you know, in spite of 

being so famous.'  
 

How very nice of Mrs Allcock to come, and the Councillor, and she 

did hope they'd enjoy their afternoon. 'JasonRudd please look after Mrs 

Allcock.'  

 

Councillor and Mrs Allcock were passed on to JasonRudd and drinks.  

 

'Oh, Mrs Bantry, it is nice of you to come.'  

 

'I wouldn't have missed it for the world,' said Mrs Bantry and moved 

on purposefully towards the Martinis.  

 

The young man called Hailey Preston ministered to her in a tender 
manner and then made off, consulting a little list in his hand, to 

fetch, no doubt, more of the Chosen to the Presence. It was all 

being managed very well, Mrs Bantry thought, turning, Martini in 

hand, to watch the next arrivals. The vicar, a lean, ascetic man, was 

looking vague and slightly bewildered. He said earnestly to MarinaGregg 

:  

 

'Very nice of you to ask me. I'm afraid, you know, I haven't got a 

television set myself, but of course I - er - I - well, of course my 

young people keep me up to the mark.'  

 

Nobody knew what he meant. Miss Zielinsky, who was also on duty, 

administered a lemonade to him with a kindly smile. Mr and Mrs 

Badcock were next up the stairs. Heather Badcock, flushed and 

triumphant, came a little ahead of her husband.  



 

'Mr and Mrs Badcock,' boomed the man in livery.  
 

'Mrs Badcock,' said the vicar, turning back, lemonade in his hand, 

'the indefatigable secretary of the association. She's one of our 

hardest workers. In fact I don't know what the St John would do 

without her.'  

 

'I'm sure you've been wonderful,' said MarinaGregg.  

 

'You don't remember me?' said Heather, in an arch manner. 'How 

should you, with all the hundreds of people you meet. And anyway, 

it was years ago. In Bermuda of all places in the world. I was there 

with one of our ambulance units. Oh, it's a long time ago now.'  

 
'Of course,' said MarinaGregg , once more all charm and smiles.  

 

'I remember it all so well,' said Mrs Badcock, 'I was thrilled, you 

know, absolutely thrilled. I was only a girl at the time. To think there 

was a chance of seeing MarinaGregg  in the flesh oh! I was a mad 

fan of yours always.'  

 

'It's too kind of you, really too kind of you,' said MarinaGregg sweetly, her 

eyes beginning to hover faintly over Heather's shoulder towards the 

next arrivals.  

 

'I'm not going to detain you,' said Heather - 'but I must -'  

 

'Poor MarinaGregg ,' said Mrs Bantry to herself. 'I suppose this kind 

of thing is always happening to her! The patience they need!'  



 

Heather was continuing in a determined manner with her story.  
 

Mrs Allcock breathed heavily at Mrs Bantry's shoulder.  

 

'The changes they've made here! You wouldn't believe till you saw 

for yourself. What it must have cost...'  

 

'I - didn't feel really ill - and I thought I just must -'  

 

'This is vodka,' Mrs Allcock regarded her glass suspiciously. 'Mr 

Rudd asked if I'd like to try it. Sounds very Russian. I don't think I 

like it very much...'  

 

'- I said to myself, I won't be beaten! I put a lot of makeup on my face 
-'  

 

'I suppose it would be rude if I just put it down somewhere.' Mrs 

Allcock sounded desperate.  

 

Mrs Bantry reassured her gently.  

 

'Not at all. Vodka ought really to be thrown straight down the throat' 

- Mrs Allcock looked startled - 'but that needs practice. Put it down 

on the table and get yourself a Martini from that tray the butler's 

carrying.'  

 

She turned back to hear Heather Badcock's triumphant peroration.  

 



'I've never forgotten how wonderful you were that day. It was a 

hundred times worth it.'  
 

MarinaGregg's response was this time not so automatic. Her eyes which 

had wavered over Heather Badcock's shoulder, now seemed to be 

fixed on the wall midway up the stairs. She was staring and there 

was something so ghastly in her expression that Mrs Bantry half 

took a step forward. Was the woman going to faint? What on earth 

could she be seeing that gave her that basilisk look? But before she 

could reach MarinaGregg's side the latter had recovered herself. Her 

eyes, vague and unfocussed, returned to Heather and the charm of 

manner was turned on once more, albeit a shade mechanically.  

 

'What a nice little story. Now, what will you have to drink? JasonRudd! A 

cocktail?'  
 

'Well, really I usually have a lemonade or orange juice.'  

 

'You must have something better than that,' said MarinaGregg. 'This is a 

feast day, remember.'  

 

'Let me persuade you to an American daiquiri,' said JasonRudd, 

appearing with a couple in his hand. 'They're MarinaGregg's favourites, 

too.'  

 

He handed one to his wife.  

 

'I shouldn't drink any more,' said MarinaGregg, 'I've had three already.' 

But she accepted the glass.  

 



Heather took her drink from JasonRudd. MarinaGregg turned away to meet the 

next person who was arriving.  
 

Mrs Bantry said to Mrs Allcock, 'Let's go and see the bathrooms.'  

 

'Oh, do you think we can? Wouldn't it look rather rude?'  

 

'I'm sure it wouldn't,' said Mrs Bantry. She spoke to JasonRudd. 

'We want to explore your wonderful new bathrooms, JasonRuddRudd. May 

we satisfy this purely domestic curiosity?'  

 

'Sure,' said JasonRudd, grinning. 'Go and enjoy yourselves, girls. Draw 

yourselves baths if you like.'  

 

Mrs Allcock followed Mrs Bantry along the passage.  
 

'That was ever so kind of you, Mrs Bantry. I must say I wouldn't have 

dared myself.'  

 

'One has to dare if one wants to get anywhere,' said Mrs Bantry.  

 

They went along the passage, opening various doors. Presently 

'Ahs' and 'Ohs' began to escape Mrs Allcock and two other women 

who had joined the party.  

 

'I do like the pink one,' said Mrs Allcock. 'Oh, I like the pink one a 

lot.'  

 

'I like the one with the dolphin tiles,' said one of the other women.  

 



Mrs Bantry acted the part of hostess with complete enjoyment. For 

a moment she had really forgotten that the house no longer 
belonged to her.  

 

'All those showers!' said Mrs Allcock with awe. 'Not that I really like 

showers. I never know how you keep your head dry.'  

 

'It'd be nice to have a peep into the bedrooms,' said one of the other 

women, wistfully, 'but I suppose it'd be a bit too nosy. What do you 

think?'  

 

'Oh, I don't think we could do that,' said Mrs Allcock. They both 

looked hopefully at Mrs Bantry.  

 

'Well,' said Mrs Bantry, 'no, I suppose we oughtn't to -' then she took 
pity on them, 'But - I don't think anyone would know if we have one 

peep.' She put her hand on a door-handle.  

 

But that had been attended to. The bedrooms were locked. 

Everyone was very disappointed.  

 

'I suppose they've got to have some privacy,' said Mrs Bantry 

kindly.  

 

They retraced their steps along the corridors. Mrs Bantry looked 

out of one of the landing windows. She noted below her Mrs Meavy 

(from the Development) looking incredibly smart in a ruffled 

organdie dress. With Mrs Meavy, she noticed, was Miss Marple's 

Cherry, whose last name for the moment Mrs Bantry could not 



remember. They seemed to be enjoying themselves and were 

laughing and talking.  
 

Suddenly the house felt to Mrs Bantry old, worn-out and highly 

artificial. In spite of its new gleaming paint, its alterations, it was in 

essence a tired old Victorian mansion. 'I was wise to go,' thought 

Mrs Bantry. 'Houses are like everything else. There comes a time 

when they've just had their day. This has had its day. It's been given 

a face lift, but I don't really think it's done it any good.'  

 

Suddenly a slight rise in the hum of voices reached her. The two 

women with her started forward.  

 

'What's happening?' said one. 'It sounds as though something's 

happening.'  
 

They stepped back along the corridor towards the stairs. Ella 

Zielinsky came rapidly along and passed them. She tried a bedroom 

door and said quickly, 'Oh, damn. Of course they've locked them 

all.'  

 

'Is anything the matter?' asked Mrs Bantry.  

 

'Someone's taken ill,' said Miss Zielinsky shortly.  

 

'Oh dear, I'm sorry. Can I do anything?'  

 

'I suppose there's a doctor here somewhere?'  

 



'I haven't seen any of our local doctors,' said Mrs Bantry, 'but 

there's almost sure to be one here.'  
 

'JasonRudd's telephoning,' said Ella Zielinsky, 'but she seems pretty 

bad.'  

 

'Who is it?' asked Mrs Bantry.  

 

'A Mrs Badcock, I think.'  

 

'Heather Badcock? But she looked so well just now.'  

 

Ella Zielinsky said impatiently, 'She's had a seizure, or a fit, or 

something. Do you know if there's anything wrong with her heart or 

anything like that?'  
 

'I don't really know anything about her,' said Mrs Bantry. 'She's new 

since my day. She comes from the Development.'  

 

'The Development? Oh, you mean that housing estate. I don't even 

know where her husband is or what he looks like.'  

 

'Middle-aged, fair, unobtrusive,' said Mrs Bantry. 'He came with her 

so he must be about somewhere.'  

 

Ella Zielinsky went into a bathroom. 'I don't know really what to give 

her,' she said. 'Sal volatile, do you think, something like that?'  

 

'Is she faint?' said Mrs Bantry.  

 



'It's more than that,' said Ella Zielinsky.  

 
'I'll see if there's anything I can do,' said Mrs Bantry. She turned 

away and walked rapidly back towards the head of the stairs. 

Turning a corner, she cannoned into JasonRudd .  

 

'Have you seen Ella?' he said. 'Ella Zielinsky?'  

 

'She went along there into one of the bathrooms. She was looking 

for something. Sal volatile - something like that.'  

 

'She needn't bother,' said JasonRudd .  

 

Something in his tone struck Mrs Bantry. She looked up sharply. 'Is 

it bad?' she said, 'really bad?'  
 

'You could call it that,' said JasonRudd . 'The poor woman's dead.'  

 

'Dead!' Mrs Bantry was really shocked. She said, as she had said 

before, 'But she looked so well just now.'  

 

'I know. I know,' said JasonRudd. He stood there, scowling. 'What a thing 

to happen!' 

 

Chapter 6 

 

'Here we are,' said Miss Knight, settling a breakfast tray on the bed-

table beside Miss Marple. 'And how are we this morning? I see 



we've got our curtains pulled back,' she added with a slight note of 

disapproval in her voice.  
 

'I wake early,' said Miss Marple. 'You probably will, when you're my 

age,' she added.  

 

'Mrs Bantry rang up,' said Miss Knight, 'about half an hour ago. She 

wanted to talk to you but I said she'd better ring up again after 

you'd had your breakfast. I wasn't going to disturb you at that hour, 

before you'd even had a cup of tea or anything to eat.'  

 

'When my friends ring up,' said Miss Marple, 'I prefer to be told.'  

 

'I'm sorry, I'm sure,' said Miss Knight, 'but it seemed to me very 

inconsiderate. When you've had your nice tea and your boiled egg 
and your toast and butter, we'll see.'  

 

'Half an hour ago,' said Miss Marple, thoughtfully, 'that would have 

been - let me see - eight o'clock.'  

 

'Much too early,' reiterated Miss Knight.  

 

'I don't believe Mrs Bantry would have rung me up then unless it 

was for some particular reason,' said Miss Marple thoughtfully. 'She 

doesn't usually ring up in the early morning.'  

 

'Oh well, dear, don't fuss your head about it,' said Miss Knight 

soothingly. 'I expect she'll be ringing up again very shortly. Or 

would you like me to get her for you?'  

 



'No thank you,' said Miss Marple. 'I prefer to eat my breakfast while 

it's hot.'  
 

'Hope I haven't forgotten anything,' said Miss Knight, cheerfully.  

 

But nothing had been forgotten. The tea had been properly made 

with boiling water, the egg had been boiled exactly three and three-

quarter minutes, the toast was evenly browned, the butter was 

arranged in a nice little pat and the small jar of honey stood beside 

it. In many ways undeniably Miss Knight was a treasure. Miss 

Marple ate her breakfast and enjoyed it. Presently the whirr of a 

vacuum cleaner began below. Cherry had arrived.  

 

Competing with the whirr of the vacuum cleaner was a fresh tuneful 

voice singing one of the latest popular tunes of the day. Miss 
Knight, corning in for the breakfast tray, shook her head.  

 

'I really wish that young woman wouldn't go singing all over the 

house,' she said. 'It's not what I call respectful.'  

 

Miss Marple smiled a little. 'It would never enter Cherry's head that 

she would have to be respectful,' she remarked. 'Why should she?'  

 

Miss Knight sniffed and said, 'Very different to what things used to 

be.'  

 

'Naturally,' said Miss Marple. 'Times change. That is a thing which 

has to be accepted.' She added, 'Perhaps you'll ring up Mrs Bantry 

now and find out what it was she wanted.'  

 



Miss Knight bustled away. A minute or two later there was a rap on 

the door and Cherry entered. She was looking bright and excited 
and extremely pretty. A plastic overall rakishly patterned with 

sailors and naval emblems was tied round her dark blue dress.  

 

'Your hair looks nice,' said Miss Marple.  

 

'Went for a perm yesterday,' said Cherry. 'A bit stiff still, but it's 

going to be all right. I came up to see if you'd heard the news.'  

 

'What news?' said Miss Marple.  

 

'About what happened at Gossington Hall yesterday. You know 

there was a big do there for the St John Ambulance?'  

 
Miss Marple nodded. 'What happened?' she asked.  

 

'Somebody died in the middle of it. A Mrs Badcock. Lives round the 

corner from us. I don't suppose you'd know her.  

 

'Mrs Badcock?' Miss Marple sounded alert. 'But I do know her. I 

think - yes, that was the name - she came out and picked me up 

when I fell down the other day. She was very kind.'  

 

'Oh, Heather Badcock's kind all right,' said Cherry. 'Overkind, some 

people say. They call it interfering. Well, anyway, she up and died. 

Just like that.'  

 

'Died! But what of?'  

 



'Search me,' said Cherry. 'She'd been taken into the house because 

of her being the secretary of the St John Ambulance, I suppose. 
She and the mayor and a lot of others. As far as I heard, she had a 

glass of something and about five minutes later she was took bad 

and died before you could snap your fingers.'  

 

'What a shocking occurrence,' said Miss Marple. 'Did she suffer 

from heart trouble?'  

 

'Sound as a bell, so they say,' Cherry said. 'Of course, you never 

know, do you? I suppose you can have something wrong with your 

heart and nobody knowing about it. Anyway, I can tell you this. 

They've not sent her home.'  

 

Miss Marple looked puzzled. 'what do you mean, not sent her 
home?'  

 

'The body,' said Cherry, her cheerfulness unimpaired. 'The doctor 

said there'd have to be an autopsy. Postmortem - whatever you call 

it. He said he hadn't attended her for anything and there was 

nothing to show the cause of death. Looks funny to me,' she added.  

 

'Now what do you mean by funny?' said Miss Marple.  

 

'Well.' Cherry considered. 'Funny. As though there was something 

behind it.'  

 

'Is her husband terribly upset?'  

 



'Looks as white as a sheet. Never saw a man as badly hit, to look at 

- that is to say.'  
 

Miss Marple's ears, long attuned to delicate nuances, led her to 

cock her head slightly on one side like an inquisitive bird.  

 

'Was he so very devoted to her?'  

 

'He did what she told him and gave her her own way,' said Cherry, 

'but that doesn't always mean you're devoted, does it? It may mean 

you haven't got the courage to stick up for yourself.'  

 

'You didn't like her?' asked Miss Marple.  

 

'I hardly know her really,' said Cherry. 'Knew her, I mean. I don't - 
didn't - dislike her. But she's just not my type. Too interfering.'  

 

'You mean inquisitive, nosy?'  

 

'No, I don't,' said Cherry. 'I don't mean that at all. She was a very 

kind woman and she was always doing things for people. And she 

was always quite sure she knew the best thing to do. What they 

thought about it wouldn't have mattered. I had an aunt like that. 

Very fond of seed cake herself and she used to bake seed cakes for 

people and take them to them, and she never troubled to find out 

whether they liked seed cake or not. There are people can't bear it, 

just can't stand the flavour of caraway. Well, Heather Badcock was 

a bit like that.'  

 



'Yes,' said Miss Marple thoughtfully, 'yes, she would have been. I 

knew someone a little like that. Such people,' she added, 'live 
dangerously - though they don't know it themselves.'  

 

Cherry stared at her. 'That's a funny thing to say. I don't quite get 

what you mean.'  

 

Miss Knight bustled in. 'Mrs Bantry seems to have gone out,' she 

said. 'She didn't say where she was going.'  

 

'I can guess where she's going,' said Miss Marple. 'She's coming 

here. I shall get up now,' she added. 

 

II 

 

Miss Marple had just ensconced herself in her favourite chair by the 

window when Mrs Bantry arrived. She was slightly out of breath.  

 

'I've got plenty to tell you, Marple,' she said.  

 

'About the fкte?' asked Miss Knight, 'you went to the fкte yesterday, 

didn't you? I was there myself for a short time early in the 

afternoon. The tea tent was very crowded. An astonishing lot of 

people seemed to be there. I didn't catch a glimpse of MarinaGregg 

, though, which was rather disappointing.'  

 



She flicked a little dust off a table and said brightly, 'Now, I'm sure 

you two want to have a nice little chat together,' and went out of the 
room.  

 

'She doesn't seem to know anything about it,' said Bantry. She fixed 

her friend with a keen glance. 'Marple, I believe - you do know.'  

 

'You mean about the death yesterday?'  

 

'You always know everything,' said Mrs Bantry. 'I cannot think how.'  

 

'Well, really dear,' said Miss Marple, 'in the same way one always 

has known everything. My daily helper, Cherry Baker, brought the 

news. I expect the butcher will be telling Miss Knight presently.'  

 
'And what do you think of it?' said Mrs Bantry.  

 

'What do I think of what?' said Miss Marple.  

 

'Now don't be aggravating, Marple, you know perfectly what I mean. 

There's this woman - whatever her name is -'  

 

'Heather Badcock,' said Miss Marple.  

 

'She arrives full of life and spirit. I was there when she came. And 

about a quarter of an hour later she sits down in a chair, says she 

doesn't feel well, gasps a bit and dies. What do you think of that?'  

 

'One mustn't jump to conclusions,' said Miss Marple. 'The point is, of 

course, what did a medical man think of it?'  



 

Mrs Bantry nodded. 'There's to be an inquest and a post-mortem,' 
she said. 'That shows what they think of it, doesn't it?'  

 

'Not necessarily,' said Miss Marple. 'Anyone may be taken ill and die 

suddenly and they have to have a post-mortem to find out the 

cause.'  

 

'It's more than that,' said Mrs Bantry.  

 

'How do you know?' said Miss Marple.  

 

'Dr Sandford went home and rang up the police.'  

 

'Who told you that?' said Miss Marple, with great interest.  
 

'Old Briggs,' said Mrs Bantry. 'At least, he didn't tell me. You know 

he goes down after hours in the evening to see to Dr Sandford's 

garden, and he was clipping something quite close to the study and 

he heard the doctor ringing up the police station in Much Benham. 

Briggs told his daughter and his daughter mentioned it to the 

postwoman and she told me,' said Mrs Bantry.  

 

Miss Marple smiled. 'I see,' she said, 'that St Mary Mead has not 

changed very much from what it used to be.'  

 

'The grape-vine is much the same,' agreed Mrs Bantry. 'Well, now, 

Marple, tell me what you think?'  

 



'One thinks, of course, of the husband,' said Miss Marple 

reflectively. 'Was he there?'  
 

'Yes, he was there. You don't think it would be suicide,' said Mrs 

Bantry.  

 

'Certainly not suicide,' said Miss Marple decisively. 'She wasn't the 

type.'  

 

'How did you come across her, Marple?'  

 

'It was the day I went for a walk to the Development, and fell down 

near her house. She was kindness itself. She was a very kind 

woman.'  

 
'Did you see the husband? Did he look as though he'd like to poison 

her?  

 

'You know what I mean,' Mrs Bantry went on as Miss Marple showed 

some slight signs of protesting. 'Did he remind you of Major Smith 

or Berrie Jones or someone you've known years ago who did 

poison a wife, or tried to?'  

 

'No,' said Miss Marple, 'he didn't remind me of anyone I know.' She 

added, 'But she did.'  

 

'Who - Mrs Badcock?'  

 

'Yes,' said Miss Marple, 'she reminded me of someone called Alison 

Wilde.'  



 

'And what was Alison Wilde like?'  
 

'She didn't know at all,' said Miss Marple slowly, 'what the world 

was like. She didn't know what people were like. She'd never 

thought about them. And so, you see, she couldn't guard against 

things happening to her.'  

 

'I don't really think I understand a word of what you're saying,' said 

Mrs Bantry.  

 

'It's very difficult to explain exactly,' said Miss Marple, 

apologetically. 'It comes really from being self-centred and I don't 

mean selfish by that,' she added. 'You can be kind and unselfish and 

even thoughtful. But if you're like Alison Wilde, you never really 
know what you may be doing. And so you never know what may 

happen to you.'  

 

'Can't you make that a little clearer?' said Mrs Bantry.  

 

'Well, I suppose I could give you a sort of figurative example. This 

isn't anything that actually happened, it's just something I'm 

inventing.'  

 

'Go on,' said Mrs Bantry.  

 

'Well, supposing you went into a shop, say, and you knew the 

proprietress had a son who was the spivvy young juvenile 

delinquent type. He was there listening while you told his mother 

about some money you had in the house, or some silver or a piece 



of jewellery. It was something you were excited and pleased about 

and you wanted to talk about it. And you also perhaps mention an 
evening that you were going out. You even say that you never lock 

the house. You're interested in what you're saying, what you're 

telling her, because it's so very much in your mind. And then, say, 

on that particular evening you come home because you've 

forgotten something and there's this bad lot of a boy in the house, 

caught in the act, and he turns round and coshes you.'  

 

'That might happen to almost anybody nowadays,' said Mrs Bantry.  

 

'Not quite,' said Miss Marple, 'most people have a sense of 

protection. They realise when it's unwise to say or do something 

because of the person or persons who are taking in what you say, 

and because of the kind of character that those people have. But as 
I say, Alison Wilde never thought of anybody else but herself - She 

was the sort of person who tells you what they've done and what 

they've seen and what they've felt and what they've heard. They 

never mention what any other people said or did. Life is a kind of 

one-way track - just their own progress through it. Other people 

seem to them just like - like wall-paper in a room.' She paused and 

then said, 'I think Heather Badcock was that kind of person.'  

 

Mrs Bantry said, 'You think she was the sort of person who might 

have butted into something without knowing what she was doing?'  

 

'And without realising that it was a dangerous thing to do,' said Miss 

Marple. She added, 'It's the only reason I can possibly think of why 

she should have been killed. If of course,' added Miss Marple, 'we 

are right in assuming that murder has been commited.'  



 

'You don't think she was blackmailing someone?' Mrs Bantry 
suggested.  

 

'Oh, no,' Miss Marple assured her. 'She was a kind, good woman. 

She'd never have done anything of that kind.' She added vexedly, 

'The whole thing seems to me very unlikely. I suppose it can't have 

been -'  

 

'Well?' Mrs Bantry urged her.  

 

'I just wondered if it might have been the wrong murder,' said Miss 

Marple thoughtfully.  

 

The door opened and Dr Haydock breezed in, Miss Knight twittering 
behind him.  

 

'Ah, at it already, I see,' said Dr Haydock, looking at the two ladies. 

'I came in to see how your health was,' he said to Miss Marple, 'but I 

needn't ask. I see you've begun to adopt the treatment that I 

suggested.'  

 

'Treatment, Doctor?'  

 

Dr Haydock pointed a finger at the knitting that lay on the table 

beside her. 'Unravelling," he said. 'I'm right, aren't I?'  

 

Miss Marple twinkled very slightly in a discreet, old-fashioned kind 

of way.  

 



'You will have your joke, Doctor Haydock,' she said.  

 
'You can't pull the wool over my eyes, my dear lady. I've known you 

too many years. Sudden death at Gossington Hall and all the 

tongues of St. Mary Mead are wagging. Isn't that so? Murder 

suggested long before anybody even knows the result of the 

inquest.'  

 

'When is the inquest to be held?' asked Miss Marple.  

 

'The day after tomorrow,' said Dr Haydock, 'and by that time,' he 

said, 'you ladies will have reviewed the whole story, decided on the 

verdict and decided on a good many other points too, I expect. 

Well,' he added, 'I shan't waste my time here. It's no good wasting 

time on a patient that doesn't need my ministrations. Your cheeks 
are pink, your eyes are bright, you've begun to enjoy yourself. 

Nothing like having an interest in life. I'll be on my way.' He stomped 

out again.  

 

'I'd rather have him than Sandford any day,' said Mrs Bantry.  

 

'So would I,' added Miss Marple. 'He's a good friend, too,' she added 

thoughtfully. 'He came, I think, to give me the go-ahead sign.'  

 

'Then it was murder,' said Mrs Bantry. They looked at each other. 

'At any rate, the doctors think so.'  

 

Miss Knight brought in cups of coffee. For once in their lives, both 

ladies were too impatient to welcome this interruption.  

 



When Miss Knight had gone Miss Marple started immediately. 'Now 

then, Dolly, you were there -'  
 

'I practically saw it happen,' said Mrs Bantry, with modest pride.  

 

'Splendid,' said Miss Marple. 'I mean - well, you know what I mean. 

So you can tell me just exactly what happened from the moment she 

arrived.'  

 

'I'd been taken into the house,' said Mrs Bantry. 'Snob status.'  

 

'Who took you in?'  

 

'Oh, a willowy-looking young man. I think he's MarinaGregg 's 

secretary or something like that. He took me in, up the staircase. 
They were having a kind of reunion reception committee at the top 

of the stairs.'  

 

'On the landing?' said Miss Marple, surprised.  

 

'Oh, they've altered all that. They've knocked the dressing-room 

and bedroom down so that you've got a big sort of alcove, 

practically a room. It's very attractive looking.'  

 

'I see. And who was there?'  

 

'MarinaGregg , being natural and charming, looking lovely in a sort 

of willowy grey-green dress. And the husband, of course, and that 

woman Ella Zielinsky I told you about. She's their social secretary. 

And there were about - oh, eight or ten people I should think. Some 



of them I knew, some of them I didn't. Some I think were from the 

studios - the ones I didn't know. There was the vicar and Doctor 
Sandford's wife. He wasn't there himself until later, and Colonel and 

Mrs Clittering and the High Sheriff. And I think there was someone 

from the press there. And a young woman with a big camera taking 

photographs.'  

 

Miss Marple nodded.  

 

'Go on.'  

 

'Heather Badcock and her husband arrived just after me. MarinaGregg 

 said nice things to me, then to somebody else, oh yes, - the 

vicar - and then Heather Badcock and her husband came. She's the 

secretary, you know, of the St John Ambulance. Somebody said 
something about that and how hard she worked and how valuable 

she was. And MarinaGregg  said some pretty things. Then Mrs 

Badcock, who struck me, I must say, Marple, as rather a tiresome 

sort of woman, began some long rigmarole of how years before 

she'd met MarinaGregg  somewhere. She wasn't awfully tactful 

about it since she urged exactly how long ago and the year it was 

and everything like that. I'm sure that actresses and film stars and 

people don't really like being reminded of the exact age they are. 

Still, she wouldn't think of that I suppose.'  

 

'No,' said Miss Marple, 'she wasn't the kind of woman who would 

have thought of that. Well?'  

 

'Well, there was nothing particular in that except for the fact that 

MarinaGregg  didn't do her usual stuff.'  



 

'You mean she was annoyed?'  
 

'No, no, I don't mean that. As a matter of fact I'm not at all sure that 

she heard a word of it. She was staring, you know, over Mrs 

Badcock's shoulder and when Mrs Badcock had finished her rather 

silly story of how she got out of a bed of sickness and sneaked out 

of the house to go and meet MarinaGregg and get her autograph, there 

was a sort of odd silence. Then I saw her face.'  

 

'Whose face? Mrs Badcock's?'  

 

'No. MarinaGregg 's. It was as though she hadn't heard a word the 

Badcock woman was saying. She was staring over her shoulder 

right at the wall opposite. Staring with - I can't explain it to you -'  
 

'But do try, Dolly,' said Miss Marple, 'because I think perhaps that 

this might be important.'  

 

'She had a kind of frozen look,' said Mrs Bantry, struggling with 

words, 'as though she'd seen something that - oh dear me, how 

hard it is to describe things. Do you remember the Lady of Shalott?  

 

The mirror crack'd from side to side:  

 

"The doom has come upon me," cried the Lady of Shalott.  

 



Well, that's what she looked like. People laugh at Tennyson 

nowadays, but the Lady of Shalott always thrilled me when I was 
young and it still does.'  

 

'She had a frozen look,' repeated Miss Marple thoughtfully. 'And she 

was looking over Mrs Badcock's shoulder at the wall. What was on 

the wall?'  

 

'Oh! A picture of some kind, I think,' said Mrs Bantry. 'You know, 

Italian. I think it was a copy of a Bellini Madonna, but I'm not sure. A 

picture where the Virgin is holding up a laughing child.'  

 

Miss Marple frowned. 'I can't see that a picture could give her that 

expression.'  

 
'Especially as she must see it every day,' agreed Mrs Bantry.  

 

'There were people coming up the stairs still, I suppose?'  

 

'Oh yes, there were.'  

 

'Who were they, do you remember?'  

 

'You mean she might have been looking at one of the people coming 

up the stairs?'  

 

'Well, it's possible, isn't it?' said Miss Marple.  

 

'Yes - of course - Now let me see. There was the mayor, all dressed 

up too with his chains and all, and his wife, and there was a man 



with long hair and one of those funny beards they wear nowadays. 

Quite a young man. And there was the girl with the camera. She'd 
taken her position on the stairs so as to get photos of people 

coming up and having their hands shaken by MarinaGregg, and - let me 

see, two people I didn't know. Studio people, I think, and the Grices 

from Lower Farm. There may have been others, but that's all I can 

remember now.'  

 

'Doesn't sound very promising,' said Miss Marple. 'What happened 

next?'  

 

'I think JasonRudd  nudged her or something because all of a 

sudden she seemed to pull herself together and she smiled at Mrs 

Badcock, and she began to say all the usual things. You know, 

sweet, unspoilt, natural, charming, the usual bag of tricks.'  
 

'And then?'  

 

'And then JasonRudd  gave them drinks.'  

 

'What kind of drinks?'  

 

'Daiquiris, I think. He said they were his wife's favourites. He gave 

one to her and one to the Badcock woman.'  

 

'That's very interesting,' said Miss Marple. 'Very interesting indeed. 

And what happened after that?'  

 



'I don't know, because I took a gaggle of women to look at the 

bathrooms. The next thing I knew was when the secretary woman 
came rushing along and said someone had been taken ill.' 

 

Chapter 7 

 

The inquest, when it was held, was short and disappointing. 

Evidence of identification was given by the husband, and the only 

other evidence was medical. Heather Badcock had died as a result 

of four grains of hyethyldexylbarboquindelorytate, or, let us be 

frank, some such name. There was no evidence to show how the 

drug was administered.  

 

The inquest was adjourned for a fortnight.  

 
After it was concluded, Detective-Inspector Frank Cornish joined 

Arthur Badcock.  

 

'Could I have a word with you, Mr Badcock?'  

 

'Of course, of course.'  

 

Arthur Badcock looked more like a chewed-out bit of string than 

ever. 'I can't understand it,' he muttered. 'I simply can't understand 

it.'  

 

'I've got a car here,' said Cornish. 'We'll drive back to your house, 

shall we? Nicer and more private there.'  



 

'Thank you, sir. Yes, yes, I'm sure that would be much better.'  
 

They drew up at the neat little blue-painted gate of No. 3 Arlington 

Close. Arthur Badcock led the way and the inspector followed him. 

He drew out his latch-key but before he had inserted it into the 

door, it was opened from inside. The woman who opened it stood 

back looking slightly embarrassed. Arthur Badcock looked startled.  

 

'Mary,' he said.  

 

'I was just getting you ready some tea, Arthur. I thought you'd need 

it when you came back from the inquest.'  

 

'That's very kind of you, I'm sure,' said Arthur Badcock gratefully. 
Er -' he hesitated. 'This is Inspector Cornish, Mrs Bain, She's a 

neighbour of mine.'  

 

'I see,' said Inspector Cornish.  

 

'I'll get another cup,' said Mrs Bain.  

 

She disappeared and rather doubtfully Arthur Badcock showed the 

inspector into the bright cretonne-covered sitting-room to the right 

of the hall.  

 

'She's very kind,' said Arthur Badcock. 'Very kind always.'  

 

'You've known her a long time?'  

 



'Oh, no. Only since we came here.'  

 
'You've been here two years, I believe, or is it three?'  

 

'Just about three now,' said Arthur. 'Mrs Bain only got here six 

months ago,' he explained. 'Her son works near here and so, after 

her husband's death, she came down to live here and he boards 

with her.'  

 

Mrs Bain appeared at this point bringing the tray from the kitchen. 

She was a dark, rather intense-looking woman of about forty years 

of age. She had gipsy colouring that went with her dark hair and 

eyes. There was something a little odd about her eyes. They had a 

watchful look. She put down the tray on the table and Inspector 

Cornish said something pleasant and non-committal. Something in 
him, some professional instinct, was on the alert. The watchful look 

in the woman's eyes, the slight start she had given when Arthur 

introduced him had not passed unnoticed. He was familiar with that 

slight uneasiness in the presence of the police. There were two 

kinds of uneasiness. One was the kind of natural alarm and distrust 

as of those who might have offended unwittingly against the 

majesty of the law, but there was a second kind. And it was the 

second kind that he felt sure was present here. Mrs Bain, he 

thought, had had at some time some connection with the police, 

something that had left her wary and ill at ease. He made a mental 

note to find out a little more about Mary Bain. Having set down the 

tea tray, and refused to partake herself saying she had to get home, 

she departed.  

 

'Seems a nice woman,' said Inspector Cornish.  



 

'Yes, indeed. She's very kind, a very good neighbour, a very 
sympathetic woman,' said Arthur Badcock.  

 

'Was she a great friend of your wife?'  

 

'No. No, I wouldn't say that. They were neighbourly and on pleasant 

terms. Nothing special about it though.'  

 

'I see. Now, Mr Badcock, we want as much information as we can 

from you. The findings of the inquest have been a shock to you, I 

expect?'  

 

'Oh, they have, Inspector. Of course I realized that you must think 

something was wrong and I almost thought so myself because 
Heather has always been such a healthy woman. Practically never 

a day's illness. I said to myself, "There must be something wrong." 

But it seems so incredible, if you understand what I mean, 

Inspector. Really quite incredible. What is this stuff - this Bi-ethyl-

hex -' he came to a stop.  

 

'There is an easier name for it,' said the inspector. 'It's sold under a 

trade name, the trade name of Calmo. Ever come across it?'  

 

Arthur Badcock shook his head, perplexed.  

 

'It's more used in America than here,' said the inspector.  

 

'They prescribe it very freely over there, I understand.'  

 



'What's it for?'  

 
'It induces, or so I understand, a happy and tranquil state of mind,' 

said Cornish. 'It's prescribed for those under strain; suffering 

anxiety, depression, melancholy, sleeplessness and a good many 

other things. The properly prescribed dose is not dangerous, but 

overdoses are not to be advised. It would seem that your wife took 

something like six times the ordinary dose.'  

 

Badcock stared. 'Heather never took anything like that in her life,' 

he said. 'I'm sure of it. She wasn't one for taking medicines anyway. 

She was never depressed or worried. She was one of the most 

cheerful women you could possibly imagine.'  

 

The inspector nodded. 'I see. And no doctor had prescribed 
anything of this kind for her?'  

 

'No. Certainly not. I'm sure of that.'  

 

'Who was her doctor?'  

 

'She was on Dr Sims's panel, but I don't think she's been to him 

once since we've been here.'  

 

Inspector Cornish said thoughtfully, 'So she doesn't seem the kind 

of woman to have been likely to need such a thing, or to have taken 

it?'  

 

'She didn't, Inspector, I'm sure she didn't. She must have taken it by 

a mistake of some kind.'  



 

'It's a very difficult mistake to make,' said Inspector Cornish. 'What 
did she have to eat and drink that afternoon?'  

 

'Well, let me see. For lunch -'  

 

'You needn't go back as far as lunch', said Cornish. 'Given in such 

quantity the drug would act quickly and suddenly. Tea. Go back to 

tea.'  

 

'Well, we went into the marquee in the grounds. It was a terrible 

scram in there, but we managed in the end to get a bun each and a 

cup of tea. We finished it as quickly as possible bemuse it was very 

hot in the marquee and we came out again.'  

 
'And that's all she had, a bun and cup off tea there?'  

 

'That's right, sir.'  

 

'And after that you went into the house. Is that right?'  

 

'Yes. The young lady came and said that Mrs MarinaGregg  would 

be very pleased to see my wife if she would like to come into the 

house. Of course my wife was delighted. She had been talking 

about MarinaGregg  for days... Everybody was excited. Oh well, you 

know that, inspector, as well as anyone does.'  

 

'Yes, indeed,' said Cornish. 'My wife was excited, too. Why, from all 

around people were paying their shilling to go in and see 



Gossington Hall and what had been done there, and hoped to catch 

a glimpse of MarinaGregg  herself.'  
 

'The young lady took us into the house,' said Arthur Badcock, 'and 

up the stairs. That's where the party was. On the landing up there. 

But it looked quite different from what it used to look like, so I 

understand. It was more like a room, a sort of big hollowed out 

place with chairs and tables with drinks on them. There were about 

ten or twelve people there, I suppose.'  

 

Inspector Cornish nodded. 'And you were received there by 

whom?'  

 

'By Miss MarinaGregg  herself. Her husband was with her. I've 

forgotten his name now.'  
 

'JasonRudd ,' said Inspector Cornish.  

 

'Oh, yes, not that I noticed him at first. Well, anyway, Miss MarinaGregg

greeted Heather very nicely and seemed very pleased to see her, 

and Heather was talking and telling a story of how she'd once met 

Miss MarinaGregg years ago in the West Indies and everything seemed as 

right as rain.'  

 

'Everything seemed as right as rain,' echoed the inspector. 'And 

then?'  

 

'And then Miss MarinaGregg said what would we have? And Miss MarinaGregg's 

husband, JasonRuddRudd, got Heather a kind of cocktail, a dickery or 

something like that.'  



 

'A daiquiri.'  
 

That s right, sir. He brought two. One for her and one for Miss 

MarinaGregg.'  

 

'And you, what did you have?'  

 

'I had a sherry.'  

 

'I see. And you three stood there drinking together?'  

 

'Well, not quite like that. You see there were more people coming 

up the stairs. There was the mayor, for one, and some other people 

- an American gentleman and lady, I think - so we moved off a bit.'  
 

'And your wife drank her daiquiri then?'  

 

'Well, no, not then, she didn't.'  

 

'Well, if she didn't drink it then, when did she drink it?'  

 

Arthur Badcock stood frowning in remembrance. 'I think, she set it 

down on one of the tables. She saw some friends there. I think it 

was someone to do with the St John's Ambulance who'd driven over 

there from Much Benham or somewhere like that. Anyway they got 

to talking together.'  

 

'And when did she drink her drink?'  

 



Arthur Badcock again frowned. 'It was a little after that,' he said. 'It 

was getting rather more crowded by then. Somebody jogged 
Heather's elbow her glass got spilt.'  

 

'What's that?' Inspector Cornish looked up sharply. 'Her glass was 

spilt?'  

 

'Yes, that's how I remember it... She'd picked it up and I think she 

took a little sip and made rather a face. She didn't really like 

cocktails, you know, but all the same she wasn't going to be 

downed by that. Anyway, as she stood there, somebody jogged her 

elbow and the glass spilled over. It went down her dress and I think 

it went on Miss MarinaGregg's dress too. Miss MarinaGregg couldn't have been 

nicer. She said it didn't matter at all and it would make no stain and 

she gave Heather her handkerchief to wipe up Heather's dress, and 
then she passed over the drink she was holding and said, 'Have 

this, I haven't touched it yet.'  

 

'She handed over her own drink, did she?' said the inspector. 

'You're quite sure of that?'  

 

Arthur Badcock paused a moment while he thought. 'Yes, I'm quite 

sure of that,' he said.  

 

'And your wife took the drink?'  

 

'Well, she didn't want to at first, sir. She said "Oh no, I couldn't do 

that" and Miss MarinaGregg laughed and said, "I've had far too much to 

drink already."'  

 



'And so your wife took that glass and did what with it?'  

 
'She turned away a little and drank it, rather quickly, I think. And 

then we walked a little way along the corridor looking at some of 

the pictures and the curtains. Lovely curtain stuff it was, like 

nothing we'd seen before. Then I met a pal of mine, Councillor 

Allcock, and I was just passing the time of day with him when I 

looked round and saw Heather was sitting on a chair looking rather 

odd, so I came to her and said, "What's the matter?" She said she 

felt a little queer.'  

 

'What kind of queerness?'  

 

'I don't know, sir. I didn't have time. Her voice sounded very queer 

and thick and her head was rolling a little. All of a sudden she made 
a great half gasp and her head fell forward. She was dead, sir, 

dead.' 

 

Chapter 8 

 

'St Mary Mead, you say?' Chief-Inspector Craddock looked up 

sharply.  

 

The assistant commissioner was a little surprised.  

 

'Yes,' he said, 'St Mary Mead. Why? Does it -'  

 

'Nothing really,' said Dermot Craddock.  



 

'It's quite a small place, I understand,' went on the other. 'Though of 
course there's a great deal of building development going on there 

now. Practically all the way from St Mary Mead to Much Benham, I 

understand. Hellingforth Studios,' he added, 'are on the other side 

of St Mary Mead, towards Market Basing.' He was still looking 

slightly inquiring. Dermot Craddock felt that he should perhaps 

explain.  

 

'I know someone living there,' he said. 'At St Mary Mead. An old 

lady. A very old lady by now. Perhaps she's dead, I don't know. But 

if not -'  

 

The assistant commissioner took his subordinate's point, or at any 

rate he thought he did.  
 

'Yes,' he said, 'it would give you an "in" in a way. One needs a bit of 

local gossip. The whole thing is a curious business.'  

 

'The County have called us in?' Dermot asked.  

 

'Yes. I've got the chief constable's letter here. They don't seem to 

feel that it's necessarily a local affair. The largest house in the 

neighbourhood, Gossington Hall, was recently sold as a residence 

for MarinaGregg , the film star, and her husband. They're shooting 

a film at their new studios, at Hellingforth, in which she is starring. 

A fкte was held in the grounds in aid of the St John Ambulance. The 

dead woman - her name is Mrs Heather Badcock - was the local 

secretary of this and had done most of the administrative work for 



the fкte. She seems to have been a competent, sensible person, 

well liked locally.'  
 

'One of those bossy women?' suggested Craddock.  

 

'Very possibly,' said the assistant commissioner. 'Still in my 

experience, bossy women seldom get themselves murdered. I can't 

think why not. When you come to think of it, it's rather a pity. There 

was a record attendance at the fкte, it seems, good weather, 

everything running to plan. MarinaGregg  and her husband held a 

kind of small private reception in Gossington Hall. About thirty or 

forty people attended this. The local notables, various people 

connected with the St John Ambulance Association, several friends 

of MarinaGregg  herself, and a few people connected with the 

studios. All very peaceful, nice and happy. But, fantastically and 
improbably, Heather Badcock was poisoned there.'  

 

Dermot Craddock said thoughtfully, 'An odd place to choose.'  

 

'That's the chief constable's point of view. If anyone wanted to 

poison Heather Badcock, why choose that particular afternoon and 

circumstances? Hundreds of much simpler ways of doing it. A risky 

business anyway, you know, to slip a dose of deadly poison into a 

cocktail in the middle of twenty or thirty people milling about. 

Somebody ought to have seen something.'  

 

'It definitely was in the drink?'  

 



'Yes, it was definitely in the drink. We have the particulars here. 

One of those inexplicable names that doctors delight in, but 
actually a fairly common prescription in America.'  

 

'In America. I see.'  

 

'Oh, this country too. But these things are handed out much more 

freely on the other side of the Atlantic. Taken in small doses, 

beneficial.'  

 

'Supplied on prescription or can it be bought freely?'  

 

'No. You have to have a prescription.'  

 

'Yes, it's odd,' said Dermot. 'Did Heather Badcock have any 
connection with these film people?'  

 

'None whatever.'  

 

'Any member of her own family at this do?'  

 

'Her husband.'  

 

'Her husband,' said Dermot thoughtfully.  

 

'Yes, one always thinks that way,' agreed his superior officer, 'but 

the local man - Cornish, I think his name is - doesn't seem to think 

there's anything in that, although he does report that Badcock 

seemed ill at ease and nervous, but he agrees that respectable 



people often are like that when interviewed by the police. They 

appear to have been quite a devoted couple.'  
 

'In other words, the police there don't think it's their pigeon. Well, it 

ought to be interesting. I take it I'm going down there, sir?'  

 

'Yes. Better get there as soon as possible, Dermot. Who do you 

want with you?'  

 

Dermot considered for a moment or two.  

 

'Tiddler, I think,' he said thoughtfully. 'He's a good man and, what's 

more, he's a film fan. That might come in useful.'  

 

The assistant commissioner nodded. 'Good luck to you,' he said. 

 

II 

 

'Well!' exclaimed Miss Marple, going pink with pleasure and 

surprise. 'This is a surprise. How are you, my dear boy though 

you're hardly a boy now. What are you - a Chief Inspector or this 

new thing they call a Commander?'  

 

Dermot explained his present rank.  

 

'I suppose I need hardly ask what you are doing down here,' said 

Miss Marple. 'Our local murder is considered worthy of the 

attention of Scotland Yard.'  



 

'They handed it over to us,' said Dermot, 'and so, naturally, as soon 
as I got down here I came to headquarters.'  

 

'Do you mean -' Miss Marple fluttered a little.  

 

'Yes, Aunty,' said Dermot disrespectfully. 'I mean you.'  

 

'I'm afraid,' said Miss Marple regretfully, 'I'm very much out of things 

nowadays. I don't get out much.'  

 

'You get out enough to fall down and be picked up by a woman 

who's going to be murdered ten days later,' said Dermot Craddock.  

 

Miss Marple made the kind of noise that would once have been 
written down as 'tut-tut'.  

 

'I don't know where you hear these things,' she said.  

 

'You should know,' said Dermot Craddock. 'You told me yourself 

that in a village everybody knows everything.  

 

'And just off the record,' he added, 'did you think she was going to 

be murdered as soon as you looked at her?'  

 

'Of course not, of course not,' exclaimed Miss Marple. 'What an 

idea!'  

 



'You didn't see that look in her husband's eye that reminded you of 

Harry Simpson or David Jones or somebody you've known years 
ago, and subsequently pushed his wife off a precipice.'  

 

'No, I did not!' said Miss Marple. 'I'm sure Mr Badcock would never 

do a wicked thing of that kind. At least,' she added thoughtfully, 'I'm 

nearly sure.'  

 

'But human nature being what it is -' murmured Craddock, wickedly.  

 

'Exactly,' said Miss Marple. She added, 'I daresay, after the first 

natural grief, he won't miss her very much...'  

 

'Why? Did she bully him?'  

 
'Oh no,' said Miss Marple, 'but I don't think that she - well, she 

wasn't a considerate woman. Kind, yes. Considerate - no. She 

would be fond of him and look after him when he was ill and see to 

his meals and be a good housekeeper, but I don't think she would 

ever - well, that she would ever even know what he might be feeling 

or thinking. That makes rather a lonely life for a man.'  

 

'Ah,' said Dermot, 'and is his life less likely to be lonely in future?'  

 

'I expect he'll marry again,' said Miss Marple. 'Perhaps quite soon. 

And probably, which is such a pity, a woman of much the same 

type. I mean he'll marry someone with a stronger personality than 

his own.'  

 

'Anyone in view?' asked Dermot.  



 

'Not that I know of,' said Miss Marple. She added regretfully, 'But I 
know so little.'  

 

'Well, what do you think?' urged Dermot Craddock. 'You've never 

been backward in thinking things.'  

 

'I think,' said Miss Marple, unexpectedly, 'that you ought to go and 

see Mrs Bantry.'  

 

'Mrs Bantry? Who is she? One of the film lot?'  

 

'No,' said Miss Marple, 'she lives in the East Lodge at Gossington. 

She was at the party that day. She used to own Gossington at one 

time. She and her husband, Colonel Bantry.'  
 

'She was at the party. And she saw something?'  

 

'I think she must tell you herself what it was she saw. You mayn't 

think it has any bearing on the matter, but I think it might be - just 

might be - suggestive. Tell her I sent you to her and - ah yes, 

perhaps you'd better just mention the Lady of Shalott.'  

 

Dermot Craddock looked at her with his head just slightly on one 

side.  

 

'The Lady of Shalott,' he said. 'Those are the code words, are they?'  

 

'I don't know that I should put it that way,' said Miss Marple, 'but it 

will remind her of what I mean.'  



 

Dermot Craddock got up. 'I shall be back,' he warned her.  
 

'That is very nice of you,' said Miss Marple. 'Perhaps if you have 

time, you would come and have tea with me one day. If you still 

drink tea,' she added rather wistfully. 'I know that so many young 

people nowadays only go out to drinks and things. They think that 

afternoon tea is a very outmoded affair.'  

 

'I'm not as young as all that,' said Dermot Craddock. 'Yes, I'll come 

and have tea with you one day. We'll have tea and gossip and talk 

about the village. Do you know any of the film stars, by the way, or 

any of the studio lot?'  

 

'Not a thing,' said Miss Marple, 'except what I hear,' she added.  
 

'Well, you usually hear a good deal,' said Dermot Craddock. 

'Goodbye. It's been very nice to see you.' 

 

III 

 

'Oh, how do you do?' said Mrs Bantry, looking slightly taken aback 

when Dermot Craddock had introduced himself and explained who 

he was. 'How very exciting to see you. Don't you always have 

sergeants with you?'  

 

'I've got a sergeant down here, yes,' said Craddock. 'But he's busy.'  

 



'On routine enquiries?' asked Mrs Bantry, hopefully.  

 
'Something of the kind,' said Dermot gravely.  

 

'And  Marple sent you to me,' said Mrs Bantry, as she ushered 

him into her small sitting-room. 'I was just arranging some flowers,' 

she explained. 'It's one of those days when flowers won't do 

anything you want them to. They fall out, or stick up where they 

shouldn't stick up or won't lie down where you want them to lie 

down. So I'm thankful to have a distraction, and especially such an 

exciting one. So it really was murder, was it?'  

 

'Did you think it was murder?'  

 

'Well, it could have been an accident, I suppose,' said Mrs Bantry, 
'Nobody's said anything definite, officially, that is. Just that rather 

silly piece about no evidence to show by whom or in what way the 

poison was administered. But, of course, we all talk about it as 

murder.'  

 

'And about who did it?'  

 

'That's the odd part of it,' said Mrs Bantry. 'We don't. Because I 

really don't see who can have done it.'  

 

'You mean as a matter of definite physical fact you don't see who 

could have done it?'  

 

'Well, no, not that. I suppose it would have been difficult but not 

impossible. No, I mean, I don't see who could have wanted to do it.'  



 

'Nobody, you think, could have wanted to kill Heather Badcock?'  
 

'Well, frankly,' said Mrs Bantry, 'I can't imagine anybody wanting to 

kill Heather Badcock. I've seen her quite a few times, on local 

things, you know. Girl guides and the St John Ambulance, and 

various parish things. I found her a rather trying sort of woman. 

Very enthusiastic about everything and a bit given to over-

statement, and just a little bit of a gusher. But you don't want to 

murder people for that. She was the kind of woman who in the old 

days if you'd seen her approaching the front door, you'd have 

hurried out to say to your parlourmaid - which was an institution we 

had in those days, and very useful too - and told her to say "not at 

home" or "not at home to visitors," if she had conscientious 

scruples about the truth.'  
 

'You mean that one might take pains to avoid Mrs Badcock, but one 

would have no urge to remove her permanently.'  

 

'Very well put,' said Mrs Bantry, nodding approval.  

 

'She had no money to speak of,' mused Dermot, 'so nobody stood to 

gain by her death. Nobody seems to have disliked her to the point of 

hatred. I don't suppose she was blackmailing anybody?'  

 

'She wouldn't have dreamed of doing such a thing, I'm sure,' said 

Mrs Bantry. 'She was the conscientious and high-principled kind.'  

 

'And her husband wasn't having an affair with someone else?'  

 



'I shouldn't think so,' said Mrs Bantry, 'I only saw him at the party. 

He looked like a bit of chewed string. Nice but wet.'  
 

'Doesn't leave much, does it?' said Dermot Craddock. 'One falls 

back on the assumption she knew something.'  

 

'Knew something?'  

 

'To the detriment of somebody else.'  

 

Mrs Bantry shook her head again. 'I doubt it,' she said. 'I doubt it 

very much. She struck me as the kind of woman who if she had 

known anything about anyone, couldn't have helped talking about 

it.'  

 
'Well, that washes that out,' said Dermot Craddock, 'so we'll come, 

if we may, to my reasons for coming to see you. Miss Marple, for 

whom I have the greatest admiration and respect, told me that I 

was to say to you the Lady of Shalott.'  

 

'Oh, that!' said Mrs Bantry.  

 

'Yes,' said Craddock. 'That! Whatever it is.'  

 

'People don't read much Tennyson nowadays,' said Mrs Bantry.  

 

'A few echoes come back to me,' said Dermot Craddock. 'She 

looked out to Camelot, didn't she? 

 



Out flew the web and floated wide;  

 
The Mirror crack'd from side to side;  

 

"The curse has come upon me," cried  

 

The Lady of Shalott.' 

 

'Exactly. She did,' said Mrs Bantry.  

 

'I beg your pardon. Who did? Did what?'  

 

'Looked like that,' said Mrs Bantry.  

 

'Who looked like what?'  
 

'MarinaGregg .'  

 

'Ah, MarinaGregg . When was this?'  

 

'Didn't  Marple tell you?'  

 

'She didn't tell me anything. She sent me to you.'  

 

'That's tiresome of her,' said Mrs Bantry, 'because she can always 

tell things better than I can. My husband always used to say that I 

was so abrupt that he didn't know what I was talking about. 

Anyway, it may have been only my fancy. But when you see anyone 

looking like that you can't help remembering it.'  



 

'Please tell me,' said Dermot Craddock.  
 

'Well, it was at the party. I call it a party because what can one call 

things? But it was just a sort of reception up at the top of the stairs 

where they've made a kind of recess. MarinaGregg  was there and 

her husband. They fetched some of us in. They fetched me, I 

suppose, because I once owned the house, and they fetched 

Heather Badcock and her husband because she'd done all the 

running of the fкte, and the arrangements. And we happened to go 

up the stairs at about the same time, so I was standing there, you 

see, when I noticed it.'  

 

'Quite. When you noticed what?'  

 
'Well, Mrs Badcock went into a long spiel as people do when they 

meet celebrities. You know, how wonderful it was, and what a thrill 

and they'd always hoped to see them. And she went into a long 

story of how she'd once met her years ago and how exciting it had 

been. And I thought, in my own mind, you know, what a bore it must 

be for these poor celebrities to have to say all the right things. And 

then I noticed that MarinaGregg  wasn't saying the right things. She 

was just staring.'  

 

'Staring - at Mrs Badcock?'  

 

'No - no, it looked as though she'd forgotten Mrs Badcock 

altogether. I mean, I don't believe she'd even heard what Mrs 

Badcock was saying. She was just staring with what I call this Lady 

of Shalott look, as though she'd seen something awful. Something 



frightening, something that she could hardly believe she saw and 

couldn't bear to see.'  
 

'The curse has come upon me?' suggested Dermot Craddock.  

 

'Yes, just that. That's why I call it the Lady of Shalott look.'  

 

'But what was she looking at, Mrs Bantry?'  

 

'Well, I wish I knew,' said Mrs Bantry.  

 

'She was at the top of the stairs, you say?'  

 

'She was looking over Mrs Badcock's head - no, more over one 

shoulder, I think.'  
 

'Straight at the middle of the staircase?'  

 

'It might have been a little to one side.'  

 

'And there were people coming up the staircase?'  

 

'Oh yes, I should think about five or six people.'  

 

'Was she looking at one of these people in particular?'  

 

'I can't possibly tell,' said Mrs Bantry. 'You see, I wasn't facing that 

way. I was looking at her. My back was to the stairs. I thought 

perhaps she was looking at one of the pictures.'  

 



'But she must know the pictures quite well if she's living in the 

house.'  
 

'Yes, yes, of course. No, I suppose she must have been looking at 

one of the people. I wonder which.'  

 

'We have to try and find out,' said Dermot Craddock. 'Can you 

remember at all who the people were?'  

 

'Well, I know the mayor was one of them with his wife. There was 

someone who I think was a reporter, with red hair, because I was 

introduced to him later, but I can't remember his name. I never hear 

names. Galbraith - something like that. Then there was a big black 

man. I don't mean a negro - I just mean very dark, forceful looking. 

And an actress with him. A bit overblonde and the minky kind. And 
old General Barnstaple from Much Benham. He's practically ga-ga 

now, poor old man. I don't think he could have been anybody's 

doom. Oh! and the Grices from the farm.'  

 

'Those are all the people you can remember?'  

 

'Well, there may have been others. But you see I wasn't well, I mean 

I wasn't noticing particularly. I know that the mayor and General 

Barnstaple and the Americans did arrive about that time. And there 

were people taking photographs. One I think was a local man, and 

there was a girl from London, an arty-looking girl with long hair and 

a rather large camera.'  

 

'And you think it was one of those people who brought that look to 

MarinaGregg 's face?'  



 

'I didn't really think anything,' said Mrs Bantry with complete 
frankness. 'I just wondered what on earth made her look like that 

and then I didn't think of it any more. But afterwards one 

remembers about these things. But of course,' added Mrs Bantry 

with honesty, 'I may have imagined it. After all, she may have had a 

sudden toothache or a safety pin run into her or a sudden violent 

colic. The sort of thing where you try to go on as usual and not to 

show anything, but your face can't help looking awful.'  

 

Dermot Craddock laughed. 'I'm glad to see you're a realist, Mrs 

Bantry,' he said. 'As you say, it may have been something of that 

kind. But it's certainly just one interesting little fact that might be a 

pointer.'  

 
He shook his head and departed to present his official credentials 

in Much Benham. 

 

Chapter 9 

 

'So locally you've drawn a blank?' said Craddock, offering his 

cigarette case to Frank Cornish.  

 

'Completely,' said Cornish. 'No enemies, no quarrels, on good terms 

with her husband.'  

 

'No question of another woman or another man?'  

 



The other shook his head. 'Nothing of that kind. No hint of scandal 

anywhere. She wasn't what you'd call the sexy kind. She was on a 
lot of committees and things like that and there were some small 

local rivalries, but nothing beyond that.'  

 

'There wasn't anyone else the husband wanted to marry? No one in 

the office where he worked?'  

 

'He's in Biddle & Russell, the estate agents and valuers. There's 

Florrie West with adenoids, and Miss Grundle, who is at least fifty 

and as plain as a haystack - nothing much there to excite a man. 

Though for all that I shouldn't be surprised if he did marry again 

soon.'  

 

Craddock looked interested.  
 

'A neighbour,' explained Cornish.'A widow. When I went back with 

him from the inquest she'd gone in and was making him tea and 

looking after him generally. He seemed surprised and grateful. If 

you ask me, she's made up her mind to marry him, but he doesn't 

know it yet, poor chap.'  

 

'What sort of a woman is she?'  

 

'Good looking,' admitted the other. 'Not young but handsome in a 

gipsyish sort of way. High colour. Dark eyes.'  

 

'What's her name?'  

 

'Bain. Mrs Mary Bain. Mary Bain. She's a widow.'  



 

'What'd her husband do?'  
 

'No idea. She's got a son working near here who lives with her. She 

seems a quiet, respectable woman. All the same, I've a feeling I've 

seen her before.' He looked at his watch. 'Ten to twelve. I've made 

an appointment for you at Gossington Hall at twelve o'clock. We'd 

best be going.' 

 

II 

 

Dermot Craddock's eyes, which always looked gently inattentive, 

were in actuality making a close mental note of the features of 

Gossington Hall. Inspector Cornish had taken him there, had 

delivered him over to a young man called Harley Preston, and had 
then taken a tactful leave. Since then, Dermot Craddock had been 

gently nodding at Mr Preston. Hailey Preston, he gathered, was a 

kind of public relations or personal assistant, or private secretary, 

or more likely, a mixture of all three, to JasonRudd . He talked. He 

talked freely and at length without much modulation and managing 

miraculously not to repeat himself too often. He was a pleasant 

young man, anxious that his own views, reminiscent of those of Dr 

Pangloss that all was for the best in the best of all possible worlds, 

should be shared by anyone in whose company he happened to be. 

He said several times and in different ways what a terrible shame 

this had been, how worried everyone had been, how MarinaGregg was 

absolutely prostrated, how JasonRuddRudd was more upset than he could 

possibly say, how it absolutely beat anything that a thing like that 



should happen, didn't it? Possibly there might have been some kind 

of allergy to some particular kind of substance? He just put that 
forward as an idea - allergies were extraordinary things. Chief-

Inspector Craddock was to count on every possible cooperation 

that Hellingforth Studios or any of their staff could give. He was to 

ask any questions he wanted, go anywhere he liked. If they could 

help in any way they would do so. They all had had the greatest 

respect for Mrs Badcock and appreciated her strong social sense 

and the valuable work she had done for the St John Ambulance 

Association.  

 

He then started again, not in the same words but using the same 

motifs. No one could have been more eagerly co-operative. At the 

same time he endeavoured to convey how very far this was from 

the cellophane world of studios; and Mr JasonRudd  and Miss 
MarinaGregg , or any of the people in the house who surely were 

going to do their utmost to help in any way they possibly could. 

Then he nodded gently some forty-four times. Dermot Craddock 

took advantage of the pause to say:  

 

'Thank you very much.'  

 

It was said quietly but with a kind of finality that brought Mr Hailey 

Preston up with a jerk. He said:  

 

'Well -' and paused inquiringly.  

 

'You said I might ask questions?'  

 

'Sure. Sure. Fire ahead.'  



 

'Is this the place where she died?'  
 

'Mrs Badcock?'  

 

'Mrs Badcock. Is this the place?'  

 

'Yes, sure. Right here. At least, well actually I can show you the 

chair.'  

 

They were standing on the landing recess. Hailey Preston walked a 

short way along the corridor and pointed out a rather phony-

looking oak armchair.  

 

'She was sitting right there,' he said. 'She said she didn't feel well. 
Someone went to get her something, and then she just died, right 

there.'  

 

'I see.'  

 

'I don't know if she'd seen a physician lately. If she'd been warned 

that she had anything wrong with her heart '  

 

'She had nothing wrong with her heart,' said Dermot Craddock. 

'She was a healthy woman. She died of six times the maximum dose 

of a substance whose official name I will not try to pronounce but 

which I understand is generally known as Calmo.'  

 

'I know, I know,' said Hailey Preston. 'I take it myself sometimes.'  

 



'Indeed? That's very interesting. You find it has a good effect?'  

 
'Marvellous. Marvellous. It bucks you up and it soothes you down, if 

you understand what I mean. Naturally,' he added, 'you would have 

to take it in the proper dosage.'  

 

'Would there be supplies of this substance in the house?'  

 

He knew the answer to the question, but he put it as though he did 

not. Hailey Preston's answer was frankness itself.  

 

'Loads of it, I should say. There'll be a bottle of it in most of the 

bathroom cupboards here.'  

 

'Which doesn't make our task easier.'  
 

'Of course,' said Hailey Preston, 'she might have used the stuff 

herself and taken a dose, and as I say, had an allergy.'  

 

Craddock looked unconvinced - Hailey Preston sighed and said:  

 

'You're quite definite about the dosage?'  

 

'Oh yes. It was a lethal dose and Mrs Badcock did not take any such 

things herself. As far as we can make out the only things she ever 

took were bicarbonate of soda or aspirin.'  

 

Hailey Preston shook his head and said, 'That sure gives us a 

problem. Yes, it sure does.'  

 



'Where did JasonRuddRudd and Miss MarinaGregg receive their guests?'  

 
'Right here.' Harley Preston went to the spot at the top of the stairs.  

 

Chief-Inspector Craddock stood beside him. He looked at the wall 

opposite him. In the centre was an Italian Madonna and child. A 

good copy, he presumed, of some well-known picture. The blue-

robed Madonna held aloft the infant Jesus and both child and 

mother were laughing. Little groups of people stood on either side, 

their eyes upraised to the child. One of the more pleasing 

Madonnas, Dermot Craddock thought. To the right and left of this 

picture were two narrow windows. The whole effect was very 

charming but it seemed to him that there was emphatically nothing 

there that would cause a woman to look like the Lady of Shalott 

whose doom had come upon her.  
 

'People, of course, were coming up the stairs?' he asked.  

 

'Yes. They came in driblets, you know. Not too many at once. I 

shepherded up some, Ella Zielinsky, that's JasonRuddRudd's secretary, 

brought some of the others. We wanted to make it all pleasant and 

informal.'  

 

'Were you here yourself at the time Mrs Badcock came up?'  

 

'I'm ashamed to tell you, Chief-Inspector Craddock, that I just can't 

remember. I had a list of names, I went out and I shepherded 

people in. I introduced them, saw to drinks, then I'd go out and 

come up with the next batch. At the time I didn't know this Mrs 



Badcock by sight, and she wasn't one of the ones on my list to bring 

up.'  
 

'What about a Mrs Bantry?'  

 

'Ah yes, she's the former owner of this place, isn't she? I believe 

she, and Mrs Badcock and her husband, did come up about the 

same time.' He paused. 'And the mayor came just about then. He 

had a big chain on and a wife with yellow hair, wearing royal blue 

with frills. I remember all of them. I didn't pour drinks for any of 

them because I had to go down and bring up the next lot.'  

 

'Who did pour drinks for them?'  

 

'Why, I can't exactly say. There were three or four of us on duty. I 
know I went down the stairs just as the mayor was coming up.'  

 

'Who else was on the stairs as you went down, if you can 

remember?'  

 

'Jim Galbraith, one of the newspaper boys who was covering this, 

three or four others whom I didn't know. There were a couple of 

photographers, one of the locals, I don't remember his name, and 

an arty girl from London, who rather specialises in queer angle 

shots. Her camera was set right up in that corner so that she could 

get a view of Miss MarinaGregg receiving. Ah, now let me think, I rather 

fancy that that was when Ardwyck Fenn arrived.'  

 

'And who is Ardwyck Fenn?'  

 



Hailey Preston looked shocked. 'He's a big shot, Chief-Inspector. A 

very big shot in the Television and Moving Picture world. We didn't 
even know he was in this country.'  

 

'His turning up was a surprise?'  

 

'I'll say it was,' said Preston. 'Nice of him to come and quite 

unexpected.'  

 

'Was he an old friend of Miss MarinaGregg's and JasonRuddRudd's?'  

 

'He was an old friend of MarinaGregg's a good many years ago when she 

was married to her second husband. I don't know how well JasonRudd 

knew him.'  

 
'Anyway, it was a pleasant surprise when he arrived?'  

 

'Sure it was. We were all delighted.'  

 

Craddock nodded and passed from that to other subjects. He made 

meticulous inquiries about the drinks, their ingredients, how they 

were served, who served them, what servants and hired servants 

were on duty. The answers seemed to be, as Inspector Cornish had 

already hinted was the case that, although any one of thirty people 

could have poisoned Heather Badcock with the utmost ease, yet at 

the same time any one of the thirty might have been seen doing so! 

It was, Craddock reflected, a big chance to take.  

 

'Thank you,' he said at last, 'now I would like, if I may, to speak to 

Miss MarinaGregg .'  



 

Hailey Preston shook his head.  
 

'I'm sorry,' he said. 'I really am sorry but that's right out of the 

question.'  

 

Craddock's eyebrows rose.  

 

'Surely!'  

 

'She's prostrated. She's absolutely prostrated. She's got her own 

physician here looking after her. He wrote out a certificate. I've got 

it here. I'll show it to you.'  

 

Craddock took it and read it.  
 

'I see,' he said. He asked, 'Does MarinaGregg  always have a 

physician in attendance?'  

 

'They're very high strung, all these actors and actresses. It's a big 

strain, this life. It's usually considered desirable in the case of the 

big shots that they should have a physician who understands their 

constitution and their nerves. Maurice Gilchrist has a very big 

reputation. He's looked after Miss MarinaGregg for many years now. She's 

had a great deal of illness, as you may have read, in the last four 

years. She was hospitalized for a very long time. It's only about a 

year ago that she got her strength and health back.'  

 

'I see.'  

 



Hailey Preston seemed relieved that Craddock was not making any 

more protests.  
 

'You'll want to see JasonRuddRudd?' he suggested. 'He'll be -' he looked at 

his watch, '- he'll be back from the studios in about ten minutes if 

that's all right for you.'  

 

'That'll do admirably,' said Craddock. 'In the meantime is Dr 

Gilchrist in the house?'  

 

'He is.'  

 

'Then I'd like to talk to him.'  

 

'Why, certainly. I'll fetch him right away.'  
 

The young man bustled away. Dermot Craddock stood thoughtfully 

at the top of the stairs. Of course this frozen look that Mrs Bantry 

had described might have been entirely Mrs Bantry's imagination. 

She was, he thought, a woman who would jump to conclusions. At 

the same time he thought it quite likely that the conclusion to which 

she had jumped was a just one. Without going so far as to look like 

the Lady of Shalott seeing doom coming down upon her, MarinaGregg 

 might have seen something that vexed or annoyed her. 

Something that had caused her to have been negligent to a guest to 

whom she was talking. Somebody had come up those stairs, 

perhaps, who could be described as an unexpected guest - an 

unwelcome guest?  

 



He turned at the sound of footsteps. Harley Preston was back and 

with him was Dr Maurice Gilchrist. Dr Gilchrist was not at all as 
Dermot Craddock had imagined him. He had no suave bedside 

manner, neither was he theatrical in appearance. He seemed on 

the face of it, a blunt, hearty, matter-of-fact man. He was dressed in 

tweeds, slightly florid tweeds to the English idea. He had a thatch of 

brown hair and observant, keen dark eyes.  

 

'Doctor Gilchrist? I am Chief-Inspector Dermot Craddock. May I 

have a word or two with you in private?'  

 

The doctor nodded. He turned along the corridor and went along it 

almost to the end, then he pushed the door open and invited 

Craddock to enter.  

 
'No one will disturb us here,' he said.  

 

It was obviously the doctor's own bedroom, a very comfortably 

appointed one. Dr Gilchrist indicated a chair and then sat down 

himself.  

 

'I understand,' said Craddock, 'that Miss MarinaGregg , according 

to you, is unable to be interviewed. What's the matter with her, 

Doctor?'  

 

Gilchrist shrugged his shoulders very slightly.  

 

'Nerves,' he said. 'If you were to ask her questions now she'd be in a 

state bordering on hysteria within ten minutes. I can't permit that. If 

you like to send your police doctor to see me, I'd be willing to give 



him my views. She was unable to be present at the inquest for the 

same reason.'  
 

'How long,' asked Craddock, 'is such a state of things likely to 

continue?'  

 

Dr Gilchrist looked at him and smiled. It was a likeable smile.  

 

'If you want my opinion,' he said, 'a human opinion, that is, not a 

medical one, any time within the next forty-eight hours, and she'll 

be not only willing, but asking to see you! She'll be wanting to ask 

questions. She'll be wanting to answer your questions. They're like 

that!' He leaned forward. 'I'd like to try and make you understand if I 

can, Chief-Inspector, a little bit what makes these people act the 

way they do. The motion picture life is a life of continuous strain, 
and the more successful you are, the greater the strain. You live 

always, all day, in the public eye. When you're on location, when 

you're working, it's hard monotonous work with long hours. You're 

there in the morning, you sit and you wait. You do your small bit, the 

bit that's being shot over and over again. If you're rehearsing on the 

stage you'd be rehearsing as likely as not a whole act, or at any rate 

a part of an act. The thing would be in sequence, it would be more 

or less human and credible. But when you're shooting a picture 

everything's taken out of sequence. It's a monotonous, grinding 

business. It's exhausting. You live in luxury, of course, you have 

soothing drugs, you have baths and creams and powders and 

medical attention, you have relaxations and parties and people, but 

you're always in the public eye. You can't enjoy yourself quietly. You 

can't really - ever relax.'  

 



'I can understand that,' said Dermot. 'Yes, I can understand.'  

 
'And there's another thing,' went on Gilchrist. 'If you adopt this 

career, and especially if you're any good at it, you are a certain kind 

of person. You're a person - or so I've found in my experience - with 

a skin too few - a person who is plagued the whole time with 

diffidence. A terrible feeling of inadequacy, of apprehension that 

you can't do what's required of you. People say that actors and 

actresses are vain. That isn't true. They're not conceited about 

themselves; they're obsessed with themselves, yes, but they need 

reassurance the whole time. They must be continually reassured. 

Ask JasonRudd . He'll tell you the same. You have to make them feel 

they can do it, to assure them they can do it, take them over and 

over again over the same thing encouraging them the whole time 

until you get the effect you want. But they are always doubtful of 
themselves. And that makes them, in an ordinary human, 

unprofessional word: nervy. Damned nervy! A mass of nerves. And 

the worse their nerves are the better they are at the job.'  

 

'That's interesting,' said Craddock. 'Very interesting.' He paused, 

adding: 'Though I don't see quite why you -'  

 

'I'm trying to make you understand MarinaGregg ,' said Maurice 

Gilchrist. 'You've seen her pictures, no doubt.'  

 

'She's a wonderful actress,' said Dermot, 'wonderful. She has a 

personality, a beauty, a sympathy.'  

 

'Yes,' said Gilchrist, 'she has all those, and she's had to work like 

the devil to produce the effects that she has produced. In the 



process her nerves get shot to pieces, and she's not actually a 

strong woman physically. Not as strong as you need to be. She's 
got one of those temperaments that swing to and fro between 

despair and rapture. She can't help it. She's made that way. She's 

suffered a great deal in her life. A large part of the suffering has 

been her own fault, but some of it hasn't. None of her marriages has 

been happy, except, I'd say, this last one. She's married to a man 

now who loves her dearly and who's loved her for years. She's 

sheltering in that love and she's happy in it. At least, at the moment 

she's happy in it. One can't say how long all that will last. The 

trouble with her is that either she thinks that at last she's got to that 

spot or place or that moment in her life where everything's like a 

fairy tale come true, that nothing can go wrong, that she'll never be 

unhappy again; or else she's down in the dumps, a woman whose 

life is ruined, who's never known love and happiness and who never 
will again.' He added dryly, 'If she could only stop halfway between 

the two it'd be wonderful for her; and the world would lose a fine 

actress.'  

 

He paused, but Dermot Craddock did not speak. He was wondering 

why Maurice Gilchrist was saying what he did. Why this close 

detailed analysis of MarinaGregg ? Gilchrist was looking at him. It 

was as though he was urging Dermot to ask one particular 

question. Dermot wondered very much what the question was that 

he ought to ask. He said at last slowly, with the air of one feeling his 

way:  

 

'She's been very much upset by this tragedy happening here?'  

 

'Yes,' said Gilchrist, 'she has.'  



 

'Almost unnaturally so?'  
 

'That depends,' said Dr Gilchrist.  

 

'On what does it depend?'  

 

'On her reason for being so upset.'  

 

'I suppose,' said Dermot, feeling his way, 'that it was a shock, a 

sudden death happening like that in the midst of a party.'  

 

He saw very little response in the face opposite him 'Or might it,' he 

said, 'be something more than that?'  

 
'You can't tell, of course,' said Dr Gilchrist, 'how people are going to 

react. You can't tell however well you know them. They can always 

surprise you. MarinaGregg might have taken this in her stride. She's a 

soft-hearted creature. She might say, "Oh, poor, poor woman, how 

tragic. I wonder how it could have happened." She could have been 

sympathetic without really caring. After all deaths do occasionally 

occur at studio parties. Or she might, if there wasn't anything very 

interesting going on, choose - choose unconsciously, mind you - to 

dramatize herself over it. She might decide to throw a scene. Or 

there might be some quite different reason.'  

 

Dermot decided to take the bull by the horns. 'I wish,' he said, 'you 

would tell me what you really think?'  

 



'I don't know,' said Dr Gilchrist, 'I can't be sure.' He paused and 

then said, 'There's professional etiquette, you know. There's the 
relationship between doctor and patient.'  

 

'She has told you something?'  

 

'I don't think I could go as far as that.'  

 

'Did MarinaGregg  know this woman, Heather Badcock? Had she 

met her before?'  

 

'I don't think she knew her from Adam,' said Dr Gilchrist. 'No. That's 

not the trouble. If you ask me it's nothing to do with Heather 

Badcock.'  

 
Dermot said. 'This stuff, this Calmo. Does MarinaGregg  ever use it 

herself?'  

 

'Lives on it, pretty well,' said Dr Gilchrist. 'So does everyone else 

around here,' he added. 'Ella Zielinsky takes it, Harley Preston 

takes it, half the boiling takes it - it's the fashion at this moment. 

They're all much the same, these things. People get tired of one and 

they try a new one that comes out and they think it's wonderful, and 

that it makes all the difference.'  

 

'And does it make all the difference?'  

 

'Well,' said Gilchrist, 'it makes a difference. It does its work. It calms 

you or it peps you up, makes you feel you could do things which 

otherwise you might fancy that you couldn't. I don't prescribe them 



more than I can help, but they're not dangerous taken properly. 

They help people who can't help themselves.'  
 

'I wish I knew,' said Dermot Craddock, 'what it is that you are trying 

to tell me.'  

 

'I'm trying to decide,' said Gilchrist, 'what is my duty'. There are two 

duties. There's the duty of a doctor to his patient. What his patient 

says to him is confidential and must be kept so. But there's another 

point of view. You can fancy that there is a danger to a patient. You 

have to take steps to avoid that danger.'  

 

He stopped. Craddock looked at him and waited.  

 

'Yes,' said Dr Gilchrist. 'I think I know what I must do. l must ask 
you, Chief-Inspector Craddock, to keep what I am telling you 

confidential. Not from your colleagues, of course. But as far as 

regards the outer world, particularly in the house here. Do you 

agree?'  

 

'I can't bind myself,' said Craddock, 'I don't know what will arise. In 

general terms, yes, I agree. That is to say, I imagine that any piece 

of information you gave me I should prefer to keep to myself and my 

colleagues.'  

 

'Now listen,' said Gilchrist, 'this mayn't mean anything at all. Women 

say anything when they're in the state of nerves MarinaGregg  is 

now. I'm telling you something which she said to me. There may be 

nothing in it at all.'  

 



'What did she say?' asked Craddock.  

 
'She broke down after this thing happened. She sent for me. I gave 

her a sedative. I stayed there beside her, holding her hand, telling 

her to calm down, telling her things were going to be all right. Then, 

just before she went off into unconsciousness she said, "It was 

meant for me, Doctor."'  

 

Craddock stared. 'She said that, did she? And afterwards the next 

day?'  

 

'She never alluded to it again. I raised the point once. She evaded it. 

She said, "Oh, you must have made a mistake. I'm sure I never said 

anything like that. I expect I was half doped at the time."'  

 
'But you think she meant it?'  

 

'She meant it all right,' said Gilchrist. 'That's not to say that it is so,' 

he added warningly. 'Whether someone meant to poison her or 

meant to poison Heather Badcock I don't know. You'd probably 

know better than I would. All I do say is that MarinaGregg  definitely 

thought and believed that that dose was meant for her.'  

 

Craddock was silent for some moments. Then he said, 'Thank you, 

Doctor Gilchrist. I appreciate what you have told me and I realise 

your motive. If what MarinaGregg  said to you was founded on fact 

it may mean, may it not, that there is still danger to her?'  

 

'That's the point,' said Gilchrist. 'That's the whole point.'  

 



'Have you any reason to believe that that might be so?'  

 
'No, I haven't.'  

 

'No idea what her reason for thinking so was?'  

 

'No.'  

 

'Thank you.'  

 

Craddock got up. 'Just one thing more, Doctor. Do you know if she 

said the same thing to her husband?'  

 

Slowly Gilchrist shook his head. 'No,' he said, 'I'm quite sure of that. 

She didn't tell her husband.'  
 

His eyes met Dermot's for a few moments then he gave a brief nod 

of his head and said, 'You don't want me any more? All right. I'll go 

back and have a look at the patient. You shall talk to her as soon as 

it's possible.'  

 

He left the room and Craddock remained, pursing his lips up and 

whistling very softly beneath his breath. 

 

Chapter 10 

 

'JasonRudd's back now,' said Hailey Preston. 'Will you come with me, 

Chief-Inspector, I'll take you to his room.'  



 

The room which JasonRudd  used partly for office and partly for a 
sitting-room, was on the first floor. It was comfortably but not 

luxuriously furnished. It was a room which had little personality and 

no indication of the private tastes or predilection of its user. JasonRudd 

 rose from the desk at which he was sitting, and came forward 

to meet Dermot. It was wholly unnecessary, Dermot thought, for the 

room to have a personality; the user of it had so much. Hailey 

Preston had been an efficient and voluble gasbag. Gilchrist had 

force and magnetism. But here was a man whom, as Dermot 

immediately admitted to himself, it would not be easy to read. In the 

course of his career, Craddock had met and summed up many 

people. By now he was fully adept in realising the potentialities and 

very often reading the thoughts of most of the people with whom he 

came in contact. But he felt at once that one would be able to gauge 
only as much of JasonRudd 's thoughts as JasonRudd  himself 

permitted. The eyes, deepset and thoughtful, perceived but would 

not easily reveal. The ugly, rugged head spoke of an excellent 

intellect. The clown's face could repel you or attract you. Here, 

thought Dermot Craddock, to himself, is where I sit and listen and 

take very careful notes.  

 

'Sorry, Chief-Inspector, if you've had to wait for me. I was held up 

by some small complication over at the Studios. Can I offer you a 

drink?'  

 

'Not just now, thank you, JasonRuddRudd.'  

 

The clown's face suddenly crinkled into a kind of ironic amusement.  

 



'Not the house to take a drink in, is that what you're thinking?'  

 
'As a matter of fact it wasn't what I was thinking.'  

 

'No, no I suppose not. Well, Chief-Inspector, what do you want to 

know? What can I tell you?'  

 

'Mr Preston has answered very adequately all the questions I have 

put to him.'  

 

'And that has been helpful to you?'  

 

'Not as helpful as I could wish.'  

 

JasonRudd  looked inquiring.  
 

'I've also seen Dr Gilchrist. He informs me that your wife is not yet 

strong enough to be asked questions.'  

 

'MarinaGregg,' said JasonRudd , 'is very sensitive. She's subject, frankly, 

to nervous storms. And murder at such close quarters is, as you 

will admit, likely to produce a nerve storm.'  

 

'It is not a pleasant experience,' Dermot Craddock agreed, dryly.  

 

'In any ease I doubt if there is anything my wife could tell you that 

you could not learn equally well from me. I was standing beside her 

when the thing happened, and frankly I would say that I am a better 

observer than my wife.'  

 



'The first question I would like to ask,' said Dermot, '(and it is a 

question that you have probably answered already but for all that I 
would like to ask again), had you or your wife any previous 

acquaintance with Heather Badcock?'  

 

JasonRudd  shook his head.  

 

'None whatever. I certainly have never seen the woman before in 

my life. I had two letters from her on behalf of the St John 

Ambulance Association, but I had not met her personally until about 

five minutes before her death.'  

 

'But she claimed to have met your wife?'  

 

JasonRudd  nodded.  
 

'Yes, some twelve or thirteen years ago, I gather. In Bermuda. 

Some big garden party in aid of ambulances, which MarinaGregg opened 

for them, I think, and Mrs Badcock, as soon as she was introduced, 

burst into some long rigmarole of how although she was in bed with 

'flu, she had got up and had managed to come to this affair and had 

asked for and got my wife's autograph.'  

 

Again the ironical smile crinkled his face.  

 

'That, I may say, is a very common occurrence, Chief-Inspector. 

Large mobs of people are usually lined up to obtain my wife's 

autograph and it is a moment that they treasure and remember. 

Quite understandably, it is an event in their lives. Equally naturally it 

is not likely that my wife would remember one out of a thousand or 



so autograph hunters. She had, quite frankly, no recollection of 

ever having seen Mrs Badcock before.'  
 

'That I can well understand,' said Craddock. 'Now I have been told, 

JasonRuddRudd  by an onlooker that your wife was slightly distraite during 

the few moments that Heather Badcock was speaking to her. Would 

you agree that such was the case?'  

 

'Very possibly,' said JasonRudd . 'MarinaGregg is not particularly strong. 

She was, of course, used to what I may describe as her public 

social work, and could carry out her duties in that line almost 

automatically. But towards the end of a long day she was inclined 

occasionally to flag. This may have been such a moment. I did not, I 

may say, observe anything of the kind myself. No, wait a minute, 

that is not quite true. I do remember that she was a little slow in 
making her reply to Mrs Badcock. In fact I think I nudged her very 

gently in the ribs.'  

 

'Something had perhaps distracted her attention?' said Dermot.  

 

'Possibly, but it may have been just a momentary lapse through 

fatigue.'  

 

Dermot Craddock was silent for a few minutes. He looked out of the 

window where the view was the somewhat sombre one over the 

woods surrounding Gossington Hall. He looked at the pictures on 

the walls, and finally he looked at JasonRudd . JasonRudd 's face 

was attentive but nothing more. There was no guide to his feelings. 

He appeared courteous and completely at ease, but he might, 

Craddock thought, be actually nothing of the kind. This was a man 



of very high mental calibre. One would not, Dermot thought, get 

anything out of him that he was not prepared to say unless one put 
one's cards on the table. Dermot took his decision. He would do just 

that.  

 

'Has it occurred to you, JasonRuddRudd, that the poisoning of Heather 

Badcock may have been entirely accidental? That the real intended 

victim was your wife?'  

 

There was a silence. JasonRudd 's face did not change its 

expression. Dermot waited. Finally JasonRudd  gave a deep sigh 

and appeared to relax.  

 

'Yes,' he said quietly, 'you're quite right, Chief-Inspector - I have 

been sure of it all along.'  
 

'But you have said nothing to that effect, not to Inspector Cornish, 

not at the inquest?'  

 

'No.'  

 

'Why not, JasonRuddRudd?'  

 

'I could answer you very adequately by saying that it was merely a 

belief on my part unsupported by any kind of evidence. The facts 

that led me to deduce it, were facts equally accessible to the law 

which was probably better qualified to decide than I was. I knew 

nothing about Mrs Badcock personally. She might have enemies, 

someone might have decided to administer a fatal dose to her on 

this particular occasion, though it would seem a very curious and 



farfetched decision. But it might have been chosen conceivably for 

the reason that at a public occasion of this kind the issues would be 
more confused, the number of strangers present would be 

considerable and just for that reason it would be more difficult to 

bring home to the person in question the commission of such a 

crime. All that is true, but I am going to be frank with you, Chief-

Inspector. That was not my reason for keeping silent. I will tell you 

what the reason was. I didn't want my wife to suspect for one 

moment that it was she who had narrowly escaped dying by 

poison.'  

 

'Thank you for your frankness,' said Dermot. 'Not that I quite 

understand your motive in keeping silent.'  

 

'No? Perhaps it is a little difficult to explain. You would have to know 
MarinaGregg to understand. She is a person who badly needs happiness 

and security. Her life has been highly successful in the material 

sense. She has won renown artistically but her personal life has 

been one of deep unhappiness. Again and again she has thought 

that she has found happiness and was wildly and unduly elated 

thereby, and has had her hopes dashed to the ground. She is 

incapable, Mr Craddock, of taking a rational, prudent view of life. In 

her previous marriages she has expected, like a child reading a 

fairy story, to live happy ever afterwards.'  

 

Again the ironic smile changed the ugliness of the clown's face into 

a strange, sudden sweetness.  

 

'But marriage is not like that, Chief-Inspector. There can be no 

rapture continued indefinitely. We are fortunate indeed if we 



achieve a life of quiet content, affection, and serene and sober 

happiness.' He added. 'Perhaps you are married, Chief-Inspector?'  
 

Dermot Craddock shook his head.  

 

'I have not have that good, or bad fortune,' he murmured.  

 

'In our world, the moving picture world, marriage is a fully 

occupational hazard. Film stars marry often. Sometimes happily, 

sometimes disastrously, but seldom permanently. In that respect I 

should not say that MarinaGregg has had any undue cause to complain, 

but to one of her temperament things of that kind matter very 

deeply. She imbued herself with the idea that she was unlucky, that 

nothing would ever go right for her. She has always been looking 

desperately for the same things, love, happiness, affection, 
security. She was wildly anxious to have children. According to 

some medical opinion, the very strength of that anxiety frustrated 

its object. One very celebrated physician advised the adoption of a 

child. He said it is often the case that when an intense desire for 

maternity is assuaged by having adopted a baby, a child is born 

naturally shortly afterwards. MarinaGregg adopted no less than three 

children. For a time she got a certain amount of happiness and 

serenity, but it was not the real thing. You can imagine her delight 

when eleven years ago she found she was going to have a child. 

Her pleasure and delight were quite indescribable. She was in good 

health and the doctors assured her that there was every reason to 

believe that everything would go well. As you may or may not know, 

the result was tragedy. The child, a boy, was born mentally 

deficient, imbecile. The result was disastrous. MarinaGregg had a 

complete breakdown and was severely ill for years, confined to a 



sanatorium. Though her recovery was slow she did recover. Shortly 

after that we married and she began once more to take an interest 
in life and to feel that perhaps she could be happy. It was difficult at 

first for her to get a worthwhile contract for a picture. Everyone 

was inclined to doubt whether her health would stand the strain. I 

had to baffle for that.' JasonRudd 's lips set firmly together. 'Well, 

the baffle was successful. We have started shooting the picture. In 

the meantime we bought this house and set about altering it. Only 

about a fortnight ago MarinaGregg was saying to me how happy she was, 

and how she felt at last she was going to be able to settle down to a 

happy home life, her troubles behind her. I was a little nervous 

because, as usual, her expectations were too optimistic. But there 

was no doubt that she was happy. Her nervous symptoms 

disappeared, there was a calmness and a quietness about her that I 

had never seen before. Everything was going well until he paused. 
His voice became suddenly bitter. 'Until this happened! That 

woman had to die - here! That in itself was shock enough. I couldn't 

risk - I was determined not to risk - MarinaGregg's knowing that an 

attempt had been made on her life. That would have been a second, 

perhaps fatal, shock. It might have precipitated another mental 

collapse.'  

 

He looked directly at Dermot.  

 

'Do you understand - now?'  

 

'I see your point of view,' said Craddock, 'but forgive me, isn't there 

one aspect that you are neglecting? You give me your conviction 

that an attempt was made to poison your wife. Doesn't that danger 



still remain? If a poisoner does not succeed, isn't it likely that the 

attempt may be repeated?'  
 

'Naturally I've considered that,' said JasonRudd , 'but I am 

confident that, being forewarned so to speak, I can take all 

reasonable precautions for my wife's safety. I shall watch over her 

and arrange that others shall watch over her. The great thing, I feel, 

is that she herself should not know that any danger threatened her.'  

 

'And you think,' said Dermot cautiously, 'that she does not know?'  

 

'Of course not. She has no idea.'  

 

'You're sure of that?'  

 
'Certain. Such an idea would never occur to her.'  

 

'But it occurred to you,' Dermot pointed out.  

 

'That's very different,' said JasonRudd . 'Logically it was the only 

solution. But my wife isn't logical, and to begin with she could not 

possibly imagine that anyone would want to do away with her. Such 

a possibility would simply not occur to her mind.'  

 

'You may be right,' said Dermot slowly, 'but that leaves us now with 

several other questions. Again, let me put this bluntly. Whom do you 

suspect?'  

 

'I can't tell you.'  

 



'Excuse me, JasonRuddRudd, do you mean by that you can't or that you 

won't?'  
 

JasonRudd  spoke quickly. 'Can't. Can't every time. It seems to me 

just as impossible as it would seem to her that anyone would dislike 

her enough - should have a suficient grudge against her - to do 

such a thing. On the other hand, on the sheer, downright evidence 

of the facts, that is exactly what must have occurred.'  

 

'Will you outline the facts to me as you see them?'  

 

'If you like. The circumstances are quite clear. I poured out two 

daiquiri cocktails from an already prepared jug. I took them to 

MarinaGregg and Mrs Badcock. What Mrs Badcock did I do not know. She 

moved on I presume, to speak to someone she knew. My wife had 
her drink in her hand. At that moment the mayor and his wife were 

approaching. She put down her glass, as yet untouched, and 

greeted them. Then there were more greetings. An old friend we'd 

not seen for years, some other locals and one or two people from 

the studios. During that time the glass containing the cocktail stood 

on the table which was situated at that time behind us since we had 

both moved forward a little to the top of the stairs. One or two 

photographs were taken of my wife talking to the mayor, which we 

hoped would please the local population, at the special request of 

the representatives of the local newspaper. While this was being 

done I brought some fresh drinks to a few of the last arrivals. 

During that time my wife's glass must have been poisoned. Don't 

ask me how it was done, it cannot have been easy to do. On the 

other hand, it is startling, if anyone has the nerve to do an action 

openly and unconcernedly, how little people are likely to notice it! 



You ask me if I have suspicions; all I can say is that at least one of 

about twenty people might have done it. People, you see, were 
moving about in little groups, talking, occasionally going off to have 

a look at the alterations which had been done to the house. There 

was movement, continual movement. I've thought and I've thought, 

I've racked my brains but there is nothing, absolutely nothing to 

direct my suspicions to any particular person.'  

 

He paused and gave an exasperated sigh.  

 

'I understand,' said Dermot. 'Go on, please.'  

 

'I dare say you've heard the next part before.'  

 

'I should like to hear it again from you.'  
 

'Well, I had come back towards the head of the stairs. My wife had 

turned towards the table and was just picking up her glass. There 

was a slight exclamation from Mrs Badcock. Somebody must have 

jogged her arm and the glass slipped out of her fingers and was 

broken on the floor. MarinaGregg did the natural hostess's act. Her own 

skirt had been slightly touched with the liquid. She insisted no harm 

was done, used her own handkerchief to wipe Mrs Badcock's skirt 

and insisted on her having her own drink. If I remember, she said 

"I've had far too much already." So that was that. But I can assure 

you of this. The fatal dose could not have been added after that for 

Mrs Badcock immediately began to drink from the glass. As you 

know, four or five minutes later she was dead. I wonder - how I 

wonder - what the poisoner must have felt when he realised how 

badly his scheme had failed...'  



 

'All this occurred to you at the time?'  
 

'Of course not. At the time I concluded, naturally enough, this 

woman had had some kind of a seizure. Perhaps heart, coronary 

thrombosis, something of that sort. It never occurred to me that 

poisoning was involved. Would it occur to you - would it occur to 

anybody?'  

 

'Probably not,' said Dermot. 'Well, your account is clear enough and 

you seem sure of your facts. You say you have suspicion of any 

particular person. I can't quite accept that, you know.'  

 

'I assure you it's the truth.'  

 
'Let us approach it from another angle. Who is there who could 

wish to harm your wife? It all sounds melodramatic if you put it this 

way, but what enemies had she got?' JasonRudd  made an 

expressive gesture.  

 

'Enemies? Enemies? It's so hard to define what one means by an 

enemy. There's plenty of envy and jealousy in the world my wife and 

I occupy. There are always people who say malicious things, who'll 

start a whispering campaign, who will do someone they are jealous 

of a bad turn if the opportunity occurs. But that doesn't mean that 

any of those people is a murderer, or indeed even a likely murderer. 

Don't you agree?'  

 



'Yes, I agree. There must be something beyond petty dislikes or 

envies. Is there anyone whom your wife has injured, say, in the 
past?'  

 

JasonRudd  did not rebut this easily. Instead he frowned.  

 

'Honestly, I don't think so,' he said at last, 'and I may say I've given a 

lot of thought to that point.'  

 

'Anything in the nature of a love affair, an association with some 

man?'  

 

'There have of course been affairs of that kind. It may be 

considered, I suppose, that MarinaGregg has occasionally treated some 

man badly. But there is nothing to cause any lasting ill-will. I'm sure 
of it.'  

 

'What about women? Any woman who has had a lasting grudge 

against Miss MarinaGregg?'  

 

'Well,' said JasonRudd , 'you can never tell with women. I can't think 

of any particular one offhand.'  

 

'Who'd benefit financially by your wife's death?'  

 

'Her will benefits various people but not to any large extent. I 

suppose the people who'd benefit, as you put it, financially, would 

be myself as her husband and, from another angle, possibly the 

star who might replace her in this film. Though, of course, the film 

might be abandoned altogether. These things are very uncertain.'  



 

'Well, we need not go into all that now,' said Dermot.  
 

'And I have your assurance that MarinaGregg will not be told that she is in 

possible danger?'  

 

'We shall have to go into that matter,' said Dermot. 'I want to 

impress upon you that you are taking quite a considerable risk 

there. However, the matter will not arise for some days since your 

wife is still under medical care. Now there is one more thing I would 

like you to do. I would like you to write down for me as accurately as 

you can every single person who was in that recess at the top of the 

stairs, or whom you saw coming up the stairs at the time of the 

murder.'  

 
'I'll do my best, but I'm rather doubtful. You'd do far better to 

consult my secretary, Ella Zielinsky. She has a most accurate 

memory and also lists of the local lads who were there. If you'd like 

to see her now -'  

 

'I would like to talk to Miss Ella Zielinsky very much,' said Dermot. 

 

Chapter 11 

 

Surveying Dermot Craddock unemotionally through her large horn-

rimmed spectacles, Ella Zielinsky seemed to him almost too good to 

be true. With quiet businesslike alacrity she whipped out of a 

drawer a typewritten sheet and passed it across to him.  



 

'I think I can be fairly sure that there are no omissions,' she said. 
'But it is just possible that I may have included one or two names - 

local names they will be - who were not actually there. That is to say 

who may have left earlier or who may not have been found and 

brought up. Actually, I'm pretty sure that it is correct.'  

 

'A very efficient piece of work if I may say so,' said Dermot.  

 

'Thank you.'  

 

'I suppose - I am quite an ignoramus in such things - that you have 

to attain a high standard of efficiency in your job?'  

 

'One has to have things pretty well taped, yes.'  
 

'What else does your job comprise? Are you a kind of liaison officer, 

so to speak, between the studios and Gossington Hall?'  

 

'No. I've nothing to do with the studios, actually, though of course I 

naturally take messages from there on the telephone or send them. 

My job is to look after Miss MarinaGregg's social life, her public and 

private engagements, and to supervise in some degree the running 

of the house.'  

 

'You like the job?'  

 

'It's extremely well paid and I find it reasonably interesting. I didn't 

however bargain for murder,' she added dryly.  

 



'Did it seem very incredible to you?'  

 
'So much so that I am going to ask you if you are really sure it is 

murder?'  

 

'Six times the dose of di-ethyl-mexine etc. etc., could hardly be 

anything else.'  

 

'It might have been an accident of some kind.'  

 

'And how would you suggest such an accident could have 

occurred?'  

 

'More easily than you'd imagine, since you don't know the set-up. 

This house is simply full of drugs of all kinds. I don't mean dope 
when I say drugs. I mean properly prescribed remedies, but, like 

most of these things, what they call, I understand, the lethal dose is 

not very far removed from the therapeutic dose.'  

 

Dermot nodded.  

 

'These theatrical and picture people have the most curious lapses 

in their intelligence. Sometimes it seems to me that the more of an 

artistic genius you are, the less common sense you have in everday 

life.'  

 

'That may well be.'  

 

'What with all the bottles, cachets, powders, capsules, and little 

boxes that they carry about with them; what with popping in a 



tranquilliser here and a tonic there and a pep pill somewhere else, 

don't you think it would be easy enough that the whole thing might 
get mixed up?'  

 

'I don't see how it could apply in this case.'  

 

'Well, I think it could. Somebody, one of the guests, may have 

wanted a sedative, or a reviver, and whipped out his or her little 

container which they carry around and possibly because they 

hadn't remembered the dose because they hadn't had one for some 

time, might have put too much in a glass. Then their mind was 

distracted and they went off somewhere, and let's say this Mrs 

What's-her-name comes along, thinks it's her glass, picks it up and 

drinks it. That's surely a more feasible idea than anything else?'  

 
'You don't think that all those possibilities haven't been gone into, 

do you?'  

 

'No, I suppose not. But there were a lot of people there and a lot of 

glasses standing about with drinks in them. It happens often 

enough, you know, that you pick up the wrong glass and drink out 

of it.'  

 

'Then you don't think that Heather Badcock was deliberately 

poisoned? You think that she drank out of somebody else's glass?'  

 

'I can't imagine anything more likely to happen.'  

 



'In that case,' said Dermot speaking carefully, 'it would have had to 

be MarinaGregg 's glass. You realise that? MarinaGregg handed her her 
own glass.'  

 

'Or what she thought was her own glass,' Ella Zielinsky corrected 

him. 'You haven't talked to MarinaGregg yet, have you? she's extremely 

vague. She'd pick up any glass that looked as though it were hers, 

and drink it. I've seen her do it again and again.'  

 

'She takes Calmo?'  

 

'Oh yes, we all do.'  

 

'You too, Miss Zielinsky?'  

 
'I'm driven to it sometimes,' said Ella Zielinsky. 'These things are 

rather imitative, you know.'  

 

'I shall be glad,' said Dermot, 'when I am able to talk to Miss MarinaGregg. 

She - er - seems to be prostrated for a very long time.'  

 

'That's just throwing a temperament,' said Ella Zielinksy. 'She just 

dramatizes herself a good deal, you know. She'd never take murder 

in her stride.'  

 

'As you manage to do, Miss Zielinsky?'  

 

'When everybody about you is in a continual state of agitation,' said 

Ella dryly, 'it develops in you a desire to go to the opposite extreme.'  

 



'You learn to take a pride in not turning a hair when some shocking 

tragedy occurs?'  
 

She considered. 'It's not a really nice trait, perhaps. But I think if 

you didn't develop that sense you'd probably go round the bend 

yourself.'  

 

'Was Miss MarinaGregg - is Miss MarinaGregg a difficult person to work for?'  

 

It was something of a personal question but Dermot Craddock 

regarded it as a kind of test. If Ella Zielinsky raised her eyebrows 

and tacitly demanded what this had to do with the murder of Mrs 

Badcock, he would be forced to admit that it had nothing to do with 

it. But he wondered if Ella Zielinsky might perhaps enjoy telling him 

what she thought of MarinaGregg .  
 

'She's a great artist. She's got a personal magnetism that comes 

over on the screen in the most extraordinary way. Because of that 

one feels it's rather a privilege to work with her. Taken purely 

personally, of course, she's hell!'  

 

'Ah,' said Dermot.  

 

'She's no kind of moderation, you see. She's up in the air or down in 

the dumps and everything is always terrifically exaggerated, and 

she changes her mind and there are an enormous lot of things that 

one must never mention or allude  

 

to because they upset her.'  

 



'Such as?'  

 
'Well, naturally, mental breakdown, or sanatoriums for mental 

cases. I think it is quite to be understood that she should be 

sensitive about that. And anything to do with children.'  

 

'Children? In what way?'  

 

'Well, it upsets her to see children, or to hear of people being happy 

with children. If she hears someone is going to have a baby or has 

just had a baby, it throws her into a state of misery at once. She can 

never have another child herself, you see, and the only one she did 

have is batty. I don't know if you knew that?'  

 

'I had heard it, yes. It's all very sad and unfortunate. But after a 
good many years you'd think she'd forget about it a little.'  

 

'She doesn't. It's an obsession with her. She broods on it.'  

 

'What does JasonRuddRudd feel about it?'  

 

'Oh, it wasn't his child. It was her last husband's, Isidore Wright's.'  

 

'Ah yes, her last husband. Where is he now?'  

 

'He married again and lives in Florida,' said Ella Zielinsky promptly.  

 

'Would you say that MarinaGregg  had made many enemies in her 

life?'  

 



'Not unduly so. Not more than most, that is to say. There are always 

rows over other women or other men or over contacts or jealousy - 
all of those things.'  

 

'She wasn't as far as you know afraid of anyone?'  

 

'MarinaGregg? Afraid of anyone? I don't think so. Why? Should she be?'  

 

'I don't know,' said Dermot. He picked up the list of names. 'Thank 

you very much, Miss Zielinsky. If there's anything else I want to 

know I'll come back. May I?'  

 

'Certainly. I'm only too anxious - we're all only too anxious - to do 

anything we can to help.' 

 

II 

 

'Well, Tom, what have you got for me?'  

 

Detective-Sergeant Tiddler grinned appreciatively. His name was 

not Tom, it was William, but the combination of Tom Tiddler had 

always been too much for his colleagues.  

 

'What gold and silver have you picked up for me? continued Dermot 

Craddock.  

 

The two were staying at the Blue Boar and Tiddler had just come 

back from a day spent at the studios.  



 

'The proportion of gold is very small,' said Tiddler. 'Not much 
gossip. No startling rumours. One or two suggestions of suicide.'  

 

'Why suicide?'  

 

'They thought she might have had a row with her husband and be 

trying to make him sorry. That line of country. But that she didn't 

really mean to go so far as doing herself in.'  

 

'I can't see that that's a very helpful line,' said Dermot.  

 

'No, of course it isn't. They know nothing about it, you see. They 

don't know anything except what they're busy on. It's all highly 

technical and there's an atmosphere of "the show must go on," or 
as I suppose one ought to say the picture must go on, or the 

shooting must go on. I don't know any of the right terms. All they're 

concerned about is when MarinaGregg  will get back to the set. 

She's mucked up a picture once or twice before by staging a 

nervous breakdown.'  

 

'Do they like her on the whole?'  

 

'I should say they consider her the devil of a nuisance but for all that 

they can't help being fascinated by her when she's in the mood to 

fascinate them. Her husband's besotted about her, by the way.'  

 

'What do they think of him?'  

 



'They think he's the finest director or producer or whatever it is that 

there's ever been.'  
 

'No rumours of his being mixed up with some other star or some 

woman of some kind?'  

 

Tom Tiddler stared. 'No,' he said, 'no. Not a hint of such a thing. 

Why, do you think there might be?'  

 

'I wondered,' said Dermot. 'MarinaGregg  is convinced that that 

lethal dose was meant for her.'  

 

'Is she now? Is she right?'  

 

'Almost certainly, I should say,' Dermot replied. 'But that's not the 
point. The point is that she hasn't told her husband so, only her 

doctor.'  

 

'Do you think she would have told him if -'  

 

'I just wondered,' said Craddock, 'whether she might have had at 

the back of her mind an idea that her husband had been 

responsible. The doctor's manner was a little peculiar. I may have 

imagined it but I don't think I did.'  

 

'Well, there were no such turnouts going about at the studios,' said 

Tom. 'You hear that sort of thing soon enough.'  

 

'She herself is not embroiled with any other man?'  

 



'No, she seems to be devoted to JasonRuddRudd.'  

 
'No interesting snippets about her past?'  

 

Tiddler grinned. 'Nothing to what you can read in a film magazine 

any day of the week.'  

 

'I think I'll have to read a few,' said Dermot, 'to get the atmosphere.'  

 

'The things they say and hint!' said Tiddler.  

 

'I wonder,' said Dermot thoughtfully, 'if my Miss Marple reads film 

magazines.'  

 

'Is that the old lady who lives in the house by the church?'  
 

'That's right.'  

 

'They say she's sharp,' said Tiddler. 'They say there's nothing goes 

on here that Miss Marple doesn't hear about. She may not know 

much about the film people, but she ought to be able to give you the 

low-down on the Badcocks all right.'  

 

'It's not as simple as it used to be,' said Dermot. 'There's a new 

social life springing up here. A housing estate, big building 

development. The Badcocks are fairly new and come from there.'  

 

'I didn't hear much about the locals, of course,' said Tiddler.  

 

'I concentrated on the sex life of film stars and such things.'  



 

'You haven't brought back very much,' grumbled Dermot. 'What 
about MarinaGregg 's past, anything about that?'  

 

'Done a bit of marrying in her time but not more than most, Her first 

husband didn't like getting the chuck, so they said, but he was a 

very ordinary sort of bloke. He was a realtor or something like that. 

What is a realtor, by the way?'  

 

'I think it means in the real estate business.'  

 

'Oh well, anyway, he didn't line up as very glamorous so she got rid 

of him and married a foreign count or prince. That lasted hardly any 

time at all but there don't seem to be any bones broken. She just 

shook him off and teamed up with number three. Film Star Robert 
Truscott. That was said to be a passionate love match. His wife 

didn't much like letting go of him, but she had to take it in the end. 

Big alimony. As far as I can make out everybody's hard up because 

they've got to pay so much alimony to all their ex-wives.'  

 

'But it went wrong?  

 

'Yes. She was the broken-hearted one, I gather. But another big 

romance came along a year or two later. Isidore Somebody - a 

playwright.'  

 

'It's an exotic life,' said Dermot. 'Well, we'll call it a day now. 

Tomorrow we've got to get down to a bit of hard work.'  

 

'Such as?'  



 

'Such as checking a list I've got here. Out of twenty-odd names we 
ought to be able to do some elimination and out of what's left we'll 

have to look for X.'  

 

"Any idea who X is?'  

 

'Not in the least. If it isn't JasonRudd , that is.' He added with a wry 

and ironic smile, 'I shall have to go to Miss Marple and get briefed 

on local matters.' 

 

Chapter 12 

 

Miss Marple was pursuing her own methods of research.  

 
'It's very kind, Mrs Jameson, very kind of you indeed. I can't tell you 

how grateful I am.'  

 

'Oh, don't mention it, Miss Marple I'm sure I'm glad to oblige you. I 

suppose you'll want the latest ones?'  

 

'No, no, not particularly,' said Miss Marple. 'In fact I think I'd rather 

have some of the old numbers.'  

 

'Well, here you are then,' said Mrs Jameson, 'there's a nice armful 

and I can assure you we shan't miss them. Keep them as long as 

you like. Now it's too heavy for you to carry. Jenny, how's your 

perm doing?'  



 

'She's all right, Mrs Jameson. She's had her rinse and now she's 
having a good dry-out.'  

 

'In that case, dear, you might just run along with Miss Marple here, 

and carry these magazines for her. No, really, Miss Marple, it's no 

trouble at all. Always pleased to do anything we can for you.'  

 

How kind people were, Miss Marple thought, especially when they'd 

known you practically all their lives. Mrs Jameson, after long years 

of running a hairdressing parlour had steeled herself to going as far 

in the cause of progress as to repaint her sign and call herself 

'DIANE. Hair Stylist.' Otherwise the shop remained much as before 

and catered in much the same way to the needs of its clients. It 

turned you out with a nice firm perm, it accepted the task of 
shaping and cutting for the younger generation and the resultant 

mess was accepted without too much recrimination. But the bulk of 

Mrs Jameson's clientele was a bunch of solid, stick in the mud 

middle-aged ladies who found it extremely hard to get their hair 

done the way they wanted it anywhere else.  

 

'Well, I never,' said Cherry the next morning, as she prepared to run 

a virulent Hoover round the lounge as she still called it in her mind. 

'What's all this?'  

 

'I am trying,' said Miss Marple, 'to instruct myself a little in the 

moving picture world.'  

 

She laid aside Movie News and picked up Amongst the Stars.  

 



'It's really very interesting. It reminds one so much of so many 

things.'  
 

'Fantastic lives they must lead,' said Cherry.  

 

'Specialised lives,' said Miss Marple. 'Highly specialised. It reminds 

me very much of the things a friend of mine used to tell me. She was 

a hospital nurse. The same simplicity of outlook and all the gossip 

and the rumours. And good-looking doctors causing any amount of 

havoc.'  

 

'Rather sudden, isn't it, this interest of yours?' said Cherry.  

 

'I'm finding it difficult to knit nowadays,' said Miss Marple. 'Of 

course the print of these is rather small, but I can always use a 
magnifying glass!'  

 

Cherry looked on curiously.  

 

'You're always surprising me,' she said. 'The things you take an 

interest in.'  

 

'I take an interest in everything,' said Miss Marple.  

 

'I mean taking up new subjects at your age.'  

 

Miss Marple shook her head.  

 

'They aren't really new subjects. It's human nature I'm interested in, 

you know, and human nature is much the same whether it's film 



stars or hospital nurses or people in St Mary Mead or,' she added 

thoughtfully, 'people who live in the Development.'  
 

'Can't see much likeness between me and a film star,' said Cherry 

laughing, 'more's the pity. I suppose it's MarinaGregg  and her 

husband coming to live at Gossington Hall that set you off on this.'  

 

'That and the very sad event that occurred there,' said Miss Marple.  

 

'Mrs Badcock, you mean? It was bad luck that.'  

 

'What do you think of it in the -' Miss Marple paused with the 'D' 

hovering on her lips. 'What do you and your friends think about it?' 

she amended the question.  

 
'It's a queer do,' said Cherry. 'Looks as though it were murder, 

doesn't it, though of course the police are too cagey to say so 

outright. Still, that's what it looks like.'  

 

'I don't see what else it could be,' said Miss Marple.  

 

'It couldn't be suicide,' agreed Cherry, 'not with Heather Badcock.'  

 

'Did you know her well?'  

 

'No, not really. Hardly at all. She was a bit of a nosy parker you 

know. Always wanting you to join this, join that, turn up for 

meetings at so-and-so. Too much energy. Her husband got a bit 

sick of it sometimes, I think.'  

 



'She doesn't seem to have had any real enemies.'  

 
'People used to get a bit fed up with her sometimes. The point is, I 

don't see who could have murdered her unless it was her husband. 

And he's a very meek type. Still, the worm will turn, or so they say. 

I've always heard that Crippen was ever so nice a man and that 

man, Haigh, who pickled them all in acid - they say he couldn't have 

been more charming! So one never knows, does one?'  

 

'Poor Mr Badcock,' said Miss Marple.  

 

'And people say he was upset and nervy at the fкte that day - before 

it happened, I mean - but people always say that kind of thing 

afterwards. If you ask me, he's looking better now than he's looked 

for years. Seems to have got a bit more spirit and go in him.'  
 

'Indeed?' said Miss Marple.  

 

'Nobody really thinks he did it,' said Cherry. 'Only if he didn't, who 

did? I can't help thinking myself it must have been an accident of 

some kind. Accidents do happen. You think you know all about 

mushrooms and go out and pick some. One fungus gets in among 

them and there you are, rolling about in agony and lucky if the 

doctor gets to you in time.'  

 

'Cocktails and glasses of sherry don't seem to lend themselves to 

accident,' said Miss Marple.  

 



'Oh, I don't know,' said Cherry. 'A bottle of something or other could 

have got in by mistake. Somebody I knew took a dose of 
concentrated D.D.T. once. Horribly ill they were.'  

 

'Accident,' said Miss Marple thoughtfully. 'Yes, it certainly seems 

the best solution. I must say I can't believe that in the case of 

Heather Badcock it could have been deliberate murder. I won't say 

it's impossible. Nothing is impossible, but it doesn't seem like it. No, 

I think the truth lies somewhere here.' She rustled her magazines 

and picked up another one.  

 

'You mean you're looking for some special story about someone?'  

 

'No,' said Miss Marple. 'I'm just looking for odd mentions of people 

and a way of life and something - some little something that might 
help.' She returned to her perusal of the magazines and Cherry 

removed her vacuum cleaner to the upper floor. Miss Marple's face 

was pink and interested, and being slightly deaf now, she did not 

hear the footsteps that came along the garden path towards the 

drawing-room window. It was only when a slight shadow fell on the 

page that she looked up. Dermot Craddock was standing smiling at 

her.  

 

'Doing your homework, I see,' he remarked.  

 

'Inspector Craddock, how very nice to see you. And how kind to 

spare time to come and see me. Would you like a cup of coffee, or 

possibly a glass of sherry?'  

 



'A glass of sherry would be splendid,' said Dermot. 'Don't you 

move,' he added. 'I'll ask for it as I come in.'  
 

He went round by the side door and presently joined Miss Marple.  

 

'Well,' he said, 'is that bumph giving you ideas?'  

 

'Rather too many ideas,' said Miss Marple. 'I'm not often shocked, 

you know, but this does shock me a little.'  

 

'What, the private lives of film stars?'  

 

'Oh no,' said Miss Marple, 'not that! That all seems to be most 

natural, given the circumstances and the money involved and the 

opportunities for propinquity. Oh, no, that's natural enough. I mean 
the way they're written about. I'm rather old-fashioned, you know, 

and I feel that that really shouldn't be allowed.'  

 

'It's news,' said Dermot Craddock, 'and some pretty nasty things 

can be said in the way of fair comment.'  

 

'I know,' said Miss Marple. 'It makes me sometimes very angry. I 

expect you think it's silly of me reading all these. But one does so 

badly want to be in things and of course sitting here in the house I 

can't really know as much about things as I would like to.'  

 

'That's just what I thought,' said Dermot Craddock, 'and that's why 

I've come to tell you about them.'  

 



'But, my dear boy, excuse me, would your superiors really approve 

of that?'  
 

'I don't see why not,' said Dermot. 'Here,' he added, 'I have a list. A 

list of people who were there on that landing during the short time 

of Heather Badcock's arrival until her death. We've eliminated a lot 

of people, perhaps precipitately, but I don't think so. We've 

eliminated the mayor and his wife and Alderman somebody and his 

wife and a great many of the locals, though we've kept in the 

husband. If I remember rightly you were always very suspicious of 

husbands.'  

 

'They are often the obvious suspects,' said Miss Marple, 

apologetically, 'and the obvious is so often right.'  

 
'I couldn't agree with you more,' said Craddock.  

 

'But which husband, my dear boy, are you referring to?'  

 

'Which one do you think?' asked Dermot. He eyed her sharply.  

 

Miss Marple looked at him.  

 

'JasonRudd ?' she asked.  

 

'Ah!' said Craddock. 'Your mind works just as mine does. I don't 

think it was Arthur Badcock, because you see, I don't think that 

Heather Badcock was meant to be killed. I think the intended victim 

was MarinaGregg .'  

 



'That would seem almost certain, wouldn't it?' said Miss Marple.  

 
'And so,' said Craddock, 'as we both agree on that, the field widens. 

To tell you who was there on that day, what they saw or said they 

saw, and where they were or said they were, is only a thing you 

could have observed for yourself if you'd been there. So my 

superiors, as you call them, couldn't possibly object to my 

discussing that with you, could they?'  

 

'That's very nicely put, my dear boy,' said Miss Marple.  

 

'I'll give you a little prйcis of what I was told mad then we'll come to 

the list.'  

 

He gave a brief rйsumй of what he had heard, and then he produced 
his list.  

 

'It must be one of these,' he said. 'My godfather, Sir Henry 

Clithering, told me that you once had a club here. You called it the 

Tuesday Night Club. You all dined with each other in turn and then 

someone would tell a story - a story of some real life happening 

which had ended in mystery. A mystery of which only the teller of 

the tale knew the answer. And every time, so my godfather told me, 

you guessed right. So I thought I'd come along and see if you'd do a 

bit of guessing for me this morning.'  

 

'I think that is rather a frivolous way of putting it,' said Miss Marple, 

reproving, 'but there is one question I should like to ask.'  

 

'Yes?'  



 

'What about the children?'  
 

'The children? There's only one. An imbecile child in a sanatorium 

in America. Is that what you mean?'  

 

'No,' said Miss Marple, 'that's not what I mean. It's very sad of 

course. One of those tragedies that seem to happen and there's no 

one to blame for it. No, I meant the children that I've seen 

mentioned in some article here.' She tapped the papers in front of 

her. 'Children that MarinaGregg  adopted. Two boys, I think, and a 

girl. In one case a mother with a lot of children and very little money 

to bring them up in this country, wrote to her, and asked if she 

couldn't take a child. There was a lot of very silly false sentiment 

written about that. About the mother's unselfishness and the 
wonderful home and education and future the child was going to 

have. I can't find out much about the other two. One I think was a 

foreign refugee and the other was some American child. MarinaGregg 

 adopted them at different times. I'd like to know what's 

happened to them.'  

 

Dermot Craddock looked at her curiously. 'It's odd that you should 

think of that,' he said. 'I did just vaguely wonder about those 

children myself. But how do you connect them up?'  

 

'Well,' said Miss Marple, 'as far as I can hear or find out, they're not 

living with her now, are they?'  

 



'I expect they were provided for,' said Craddock. 'In fact, I think that 

the adoption laws would insist on that. There was probably money 
settled on them in trust.'  

 

'So when she got - tired of them,' said Miss Marple with a very faint 

pause before the word 'tired,' 'they were dismissed! After being 

brought up in luxury with every advantage. Is that it?'  

 

'Probably,' said Craddock. 'I don't know exactly.' He continued to 

look at her curiously.  

 

'Children feel things, you know,' said Miss Marple, nodding her 

head. 'They feel things more than the people around them ever 

imagine. The sense of hurt, of being rejected, of not belonging. It's 

a thing that you don't get over just because of advantages. 
Education is no substitute for it, or comfortable living, or an 

assured income, or a start in a profession. It's the sort of thing that 

might rankle.'  

 

'Yes. But all the same, isn't it rather far-fetched to think that - Well, 

what exactly do you think?'  

 

'I haven't got as far as that,' said Miss Marple. 'I just wondered 

where they were now and how old they would be now? Grown up, I 

should imagine, from what I've read here.'  

 

'I could find out, I suppose,' said Dermot Craddock slowly.  

 

'Oh, I don't want to bother you in any way, or even to suggest that 

my little idea's worthwhile at all.'  



 

'There's no harm,' said Dermot Craddock, 'in having that checked 
up on.' He made a note in his little book. 'Now do you want to look at 

my little list?'  

 

'I don't really think I should be able to do anything useful about that. 

You see, I wouldn't know who the people were.'  

 

'Oh, I could give you a running commentary,' said Craddock. 'Here 

we are. JasonRudd , husband, (husbands always highly 

suspicious). Everyone says that JasonRudd  adores her. That is 

suspicious in itself, don't you think?'  

 

'Not necessarily,' said Miss Marple with dignity.  

 
'He's been very active in trying to conceal the fact that his wife was 

the object of attack. He hasn't hinted any suspicion of such a thing 

to the police. I don't know why he thinks we're such asses as not to 

think of it for ourselves. We've considered it from the first. But 

anyway, that's his story. He was afraid that knowledge of that fact 

might get to his wife's ears and that she'd go into a panic about it.'  

 

'Is she the sort of woman who goes into panics?'  

 

'Yes, she's neurasthenic, throws temperaments, has nervous 

breakdowns, gets in states.'  

 

'That might not mean any lack of courage,' Miss Marple objected.  

 



'On the other hand,' said Craddock, 'if he knows quite well that she 

was the object of attack, it's also possible that she may know who 
did it.'  

 

'You mean she knows who did it - but does not want to disclose the 

fact?'  

 

'I just say it's a possibility, and if so, one rather wonders why not? It 

looks as though the motive, the root of the matter, was something 

she didn't want to come to her husband's ear.'  

 

'That is certainly an interesting thought,' said Miss Marple.  

 

'Here are a few more names. The secretary, Ella Zielinsky. An 

extremely competent and efficient young woman.'  
 

'In love with the husband, do you think?' asked Miss Marple.  

 

'I should think definitely,' answered Craddock, 'but why should you 

think so?'  

 

'Well, it so often happens,' said Miss Marple. 'And therefore not very 

fond of poor MarinaGregg , I expect?'  

 

'Therefore possible motive for murder,' said Craddock.  

 

'A lot of secretaries and employees are in love with their employers' 

husbands,' said Miss Marple, 'but very, very few of them try to 

poison them.'  

 



'Well, we must allow for exceptions,' said Craddock. 'Then there 

were two local and one London photographer, and two members of 
the Press. None of them seems likely but we will follow them up. 

There was the woman who was formerly married to MarinaGregg 's 

second or third husband. She didn't like it when MarinaGregg  took 

her husband away. Still, that's about eleven or twelve years ago. It 

seems unlikely that she'd make a visit here at this juncture on 

purpose to poison MarinaGregg because of that. Then there's a man 

called Ardwyck Fenn. He was once a very close friend of MarinaGregg 

's. He hasn't seen her for years. He was not known to be in 

this part of the world and it was a great surprise when he turned up 

on this occasion.'  

 

'She would be startled then when she saw him?'  

 
'Presumably yes.'  

 

'Startled - and possibly frightened.'  

 

'"The doom has come upon me,"' said Craddock. 'That's the idea. 

Then there was young Hailey Preston dodging about that day, doing 

his stuff. Talks a good deal but definitely heard nothing, saw 

nothing and knew nothing. Almost too anxious to say so. Does 

anything there ring a bell?'  

 

'Not exactly,' said Miss Marple. 'Plenty of interesting possibilities. 

But I'd still like to know a little more about the children.'  

 

He looked at her curiously. 'You've got quite a bee in your bonnet 

about that, haven't you?' he said. 'All right, I'll find out.' 



 

Chapter 13 

 

'I suppose it couldn't possibly have been the mayor?' said Inspector 

Cornish wistfully.  

 

He tapped the paper with the list of names on it with his pencil. 

Dermot Craddock grinned.  

 

'Wishful thinking?' he asked.  

 

'You could certainly call it that,' said Cornish. 'Pompous, canting old 

hypocrite!' he went on. 'Everybody's got it in for him. Throws his 

weight about, ultra sanctimonious, and neck deep in graft for years 

past!'  
 

'Can't you ever bring it home to him?'  

 

'No,' said Cornish. 'He's too slick for that. He's always just on the 

right side of the law.'  

 

'It's tempting, I agree,' said Dermot Craddock, 'but I think you'll 

have to banish that rosy picture from your mind, Frank.'  

 

'I know, I know,' said Cornish. 'He's a possible, but a wildly 

improbable. Who else have we got?'  

 

Both men studied the list again. There were still eight names on it.  



 

'We're pretty well agreed,' said Craddock, 'that there's nobody 
missed out from here?' There was a faint question in his voice. 

Cornish answered it.  

 

'I think you can be pretty sure that's the lot. After Mrs Bantry came 

the vicar, and after that the Badcocks. There were then eight 

people on the stairs. The mayor and his wife, Joshua Grice and wife 

from Lower Farm. Donald McNeil of the Much Benham Herald 

Argus. Ardwyck Fenn, U.S.A., Miss Lola Brewster, U.S.A., Moving 

Picture Star. There you are. In addition there was an arty 

photographer from London with a camera set up on the angle of the 

stairs. If, as you suggest, this Mrs Bantry's story of MarinaGregg  

having a "frozen look" was occasioned by someone she saw on the 

stairs, you've got to take your pick among that lot. Mayor regretfully 
out. Grices out - never been away from St Mary Mead I should say. 

That leaves four. Local journalist unlikely, photographer girl had 

been there for half an hour already, so why should MarinaGregg react so 

late in the day? What does that leave?'  

 

'Sinister strangers from America,' said Craddock with a faint smile.  

 

'You've said it.'  

 

'They're our best suspects by far, I agree,' said Craddock. 'They 

turned up unexpectedly. Ardwyck Fenn was an old flame of 

MarinaGregg's whom she had not seen for years. Lola Brewster was once 

married to MarinaGregg 's third husband, who got a divorce from 

her in order to marry MarinaGregg. It was not, I gather, a very amicable 

divorce.'  



 

'I'd put her down as Suspect Number One,' said Cornish.  
 

'Would you, Frank? After a lapse of about fifteen years or so, and 

having remarried twice herself since then?'  

 

Cornish said that you never knew with women. Dermot accepted 

that as a general dictum, but remarked that it seemed odd to him to 

say the least of it.  

 

'But you agree that it lies between them?'  

 

'Possibly. But I don't like it very much. What about the hired help 

who were serving the drinks?'  

 
'Discounting the "frozen look" we've heard so much about? Well, 

we've checked up in a general way. Local catering from Market 

Basing had the job - for the fкte, I mean. Actually in the house, there 

was the butler, Giuseppe, in charge; and two local girls from the 

studios canteen. I know both of them. Not over-bright, but 

harmless.'  

 

'Pushing it back at me, are you? I'll go and have a word with the 

reporter chap. He might have seen something helpful. Then to 

London. Ardwyck Fenn, Lola Brewster - and the photographer girl - 

what's her name? - Margot Bence. She also might have seen 

something.'  

 

Cornish nodded. 'Lola Brewster is my best bet,' he said. He looked 

curiously at Craddock. 'You don't seem as sold on her as I am.'  



 

'I'm thinking of the difficulties,' said Dermot slowly.  
 

'Difficulties?'  

 

'Of putting poison into MarinaGregg's glass without anybody seeing her.'  

 

'Well, that's the same for everybody, isn't it? It was a mad thing to 

do.'  

 

'Agreed it was a mad thing to do, but it would be a madder thing for 

someone like Lola Brewster than for anybody else.'  

 

'Why?' asked Cornish.  

 
'Because she was a guest of importance. She's a somebody, a big 

name. Everyone would be looking at her.'  

 

'True enough,' Cornish admitted.  

 

'The locals would nudge each other and whisper and stare, and 

after MarinaGregg  and JasonRudd  greeted her she'd have been 

passed on for the secretaries to look after. It wouldn't be easy, 

Frank. However adroit you were, you couldn't be sure someone 

wouldn't see you. That's the snag there, and it's a big snag.'  

 

'As I say, isn't that snag the same for everybody?'  

 

'No,' said Craddock. 'Oh no. Far from it. Take the butler now, 

Giuseppe. He's busy with the drinks and glasses, with pouring 



things out, with handing them. He could put a pinch or a tablet or 

two of Calmo in a glass easily enough.'  
 

'Giuseppe?' Frank Cornish reflected. 'Do you think he did?'  

 

'No reason to believe so,' said Craddock, 'but we might find a 

reason. A nice solid bit of motive, that is to say. Yes, he could have 

done it. Or one of the catering staff could have done it unfortunately 

they weren't on the spot - a pity.'  

 

'Someone might have managed to get himself or herself 

deliberately planted in the firm for the purpose.'  

 

'You mean it might have been as premeditated as all that?'  

 
'We don't know anything about it yet,' said Craddock, vexedly. 'We 

absolutely don't know the first thing about it. Not until we can prise 

what we want to know out of MarinaGregg , or out of her husband. 

They must know or suspect - but they're not telling. And we don't 

know yet why they're not telling. We've a long way to go.'  

 

He paused and then resumed: 'Discounting the "frozen look" which 

may have been pure coincidence, there are other people who could 

have done it fairly easily. The secretary woman, Ella Zielinsky. She 

was also busy with glasses, with handing things to people. Nobody 

would be watching her with any particular interest. The same 

applies to that willow wand of a young man - I've forgotten his 

name. Hailey - Hailey Preston? That's right. There would have been 

a good opportunity for either of them. In fact if either of them had 



wanted to do away with MarinaGregg  it would have been far safer 

to do so on a public occasion.'  
 

'Anyone else?'  

 

'Well, there's always the husband,' said Craddock.  

 

'Back to the husbands again,' said Cornish, with a faint smile. 'We 

thought it was that poor devil, Badcock, before we realised that 

MarinaGregg was the intended victim. Now we've transferred our 

suspicions to JasonRudd . He seems devoted enough though, I 

must say.'  

 

'He has the reputation of being so,' said Craddock, 'but one never 

knows.'  
 

'If he wanted to get rid of her, wouldn't divorce be much easier?'  

 

'It would be far more usual,' agreed Dermot, 'but there may be a lot 

of ins and outs to this business that we don't know yet.'  

 

The telephone rang. Cornish took up the receiver.  

 

'What? Yes? Put them through. Yes, he's here.' He listened for a 

moment then put his hand over the receiver and looked at Dermot. 

'Miss MarinaGregg ,' he said, 'is feeling very much better. She is 

quite ready to be interviewed.'  

 

'I'd better hurry along,' said Dermot Craddock, 'before she changes 

her mind.' 



 

II 

 

At Gossington Hall Dermot Craddock was received by Ella 

Zielinsky. She was, as usual, brisk and efficient.  

 

'Miss MarinaGregg is waiting for you, Mr Craddock,' she said.  

 

Dermot looked at her with some interest. From the beginning he 

had found Ella Zielinsky an intriguing personality. He had said to 

himself,'A poker face if I ever saw one.' She had answered any 

questions he had asked with the utmost readiness. She had shown 

no signs of keeping anything back, but what she really thought or 

felt or even knew about the business, he still had no idea. There 

seemed to be no chink in the armour of her bright efficiency. She 
might know more than she said she did; she might know a good 

deal. The only thing he was sure of - and he had to admit to himself 

that he had no reasons to adduce for that surety - was that she was 

in love with JasonRudd . It was, as he had said, an occupational 

disease of secretaries. It probably meant nothing. But the fact did 

at least suggest a motive and he was sure, quite sure, that she was 

concealing something. It might be love, it might be hate. It might, 

quite simply, be guilt. She might have taken her opportunity that 

afternoon, or she might have deliberately planned what she was 

going to do. He could see her in the part quite easily, as far as the 

execution of it went. Her swift but unhurried movements, moving 

here and there, looking after guests, handing glasses to one or 

another, taking glasses away, her eyes marking the spot where 



MarinaGregg had put her glass down on the table. And then, perhaps at 

the very moment when MarinaGregg had been greeting the arrivals from 
the States, with surprise and joyous cries and everybody's eyes 

turned towards their meeting, she could have quietly and 

unobtrusively dropped the fatal dose into that glass. It would 

require audacity, nerve, swiftness. She would have had all those. 

Whatever she had done, she would not have looked guilty whilst 

she was doing it. It would have been a simple, brilliant crime, a 

crime that could hardly fail to be successful. But chance had ruled 

otherwise. In the rather crowded floorspace someone had jogged 

Heather Badcock's arm. Her drink had been spilt, and MarinaGregg, with 

her natural impulsive grace, had quickly proffered her own glass, 

standing there untouched. And so the wrong woman had died.  

 

A lot of pure theory, and probably hooey at that, said Dermot 
Craddock to himself at the same time as he was making polite 

remarks to Ella Zielinsky.  

 

'One thing I wanted to ask you, Miss Zielinsky. The catering was 

done by a Market Basing firm, I understand?'  

 

'Yes.'  

 

'Why was that particular firm chosen?'  

 

'I really don't know,' said Ella. 'That doesn't lie amongst my duties. I 

know JasonRuddRudd thought it would be more tactful to employ 

somebody local rather than to employ a firm from London. The 

whole thing was really quite a small affair from our point of view.'  

 



'Quite.' He watched her as she stood frowning a little looking down. 

A good forehead, a determined chin, a figure which could look quite 
voluptuous if it was allowed to do so, a hard mouth, an acquisitive 

mouth. The eyes? He looked at them in surprise. The lids were 

reddened. He wondered. Had she been crying? It looked like it. And 

yet he could have sworn she was not the type of young woman to 

cry. She looked up at him, and as though she read his thoughts, she 

took out her handkerchief and blew her nose heartily.  

 

'You've got a cold,' he said.  

 

'Not a cold. Hay-fever. It's an allergy of some kind, really. I always 

get at it this time of year.'  

 

There was a low buzz. There were two phones in the room, one on 
the table and one on another table in the corner. It was the latter 

one that was beginning to buzz. Ella Zielinsky went over to it and 

picked up the receiver.  

 

'Yes,' she said, 'he's here. I'll bring him up at once.' She put the 

receiver down again. 'MarinaGregg's ready for you,' she said. 

 

III 

 

MarinaGregg  received Craddock in a room on the first floor, which 

was obviously her own private sitting-room opening out of her 

bedroom. After the accounts of her prostration and her nervous 

state, Dermot Craddock had expected to find a fluttering invalid. 



But although MarinaGregg was half reclining on a sofa her voice was 

vigorous and her eyes were bright. She had very little make-up on, 
but in spite of this she did not look her age, and he was struck very 

forcibly by the subdued radiance of her beauty. It was the exquisite 

line of cheek and jawbone, the way the hair fell loosely and 

naturally to frame her face. The long sea-green eyes, the pencilled 

eyebrows, owing something to art but more to nature, and the 

warmth and sweetness of her smile, all had a subtle magic. She 

said:  

 

'Chief-Inspector Craddock? I've been behaving disgracefully. I do 

apologize. I just let myself go to pieces after this awful thing. I could 

have snapped out of it but I didn't. I'm ashamed of myself.' The smile 

came, rueful, sweet, turning up the corners of the mouth. She 

extended a hand and he took it.  
 

'It was only natural,' he said, 'that you should feel upset.'  

 

'Well, everyone was upset,' said MarinaGregg. 'I'd no business to make 

out it was worse for me than anyone else.'  

 

'Hadn't you?'  

 

She looked at him for a minute and then nodded. 'Yes,' she said, 

'you're very perceptive. Yes, I had.' She looked down and with one 

long forefinger gently stroked the arm of the sofa. It was a gesture 

he had noticed in one of her films. It was a meaningless gesture, yet 

it seemed fraught with significance. It had a kind of musing 

gentleness.  

 



'I'm a coward,' she said, her eyes still cast down. 'Somebody 

wanted to kill me and I didn't want to die.'  
 

'Why do you think someone wanted to kill you?'  

 

Her eyes opened wide. 'Because it was my glass - my drink - that 

had been tampered with. It was just a mistake that that poor stupid 

woman got it. That's what's so horrible and so tragic. Besides -'  

 

'Yes, Miss MarinaGregg?'  

 

She seemed a little uncertain about saying more.  

 

'You had other reasons perhaps for believing that you were the 

intended victim?'  
 

She nodded.  

 

'What reasons, Miss MarinaGregg?'  

 

She paused a minute longer before saying, 'JasonRudd says I must tell 

you all about it.'  

 

'You've confided in him then?'  

 

'Yes... I didn't want to at first - but Dr Gilchrist put it to me that I 

must. And then I found that he thought so too. He'd thought it all 

along but - it's rather funny really' - a rueful smile curled her lips 

again - 'he didn't want to alarm me by telling me. Really!' MarinaGregg sat 



up with a sudden vigorous movement. 'Darling Jinks! Does he think 

I'm a complete fool?'  
 

'You haven't told me yet, Miss MarinaGregg, why you should think anyone 

wanted to kill you.'  

 

She was silent for a moment and then with a sudden brusque 

gesture, she stretched out for her handbag, opened it, took out a 

piece of paper and thrust it into his hand. He read it. Typed on it 

was one line of writing:  

 

"Don't think you'll escape next time."  

 

Craddock said sharply, 'When did you get this?'  

 
'It was on my dressing-table when I came back from the bath.'  

 

'So someone in the house -'  

 

'Not necessarily. Someone could have climbed up the balcony 

outside my window and pushed it through there. I think they meant 

it to frighten me still more, but actually it didn't. I just felt furiously 

angry and sent word to you to come and see me.'  

 

Dermot Craddock smiled. 'Possibly a rather unexpected result for 

whoever sent it. Is this the first kind of message like that you've 

had?'  

 

Again MarinaGregg hesitated. Then she said, 'No, it isn't.'  

 



'Will you tell me about any others?'  

 
'It was three weeks ago, when we first came here. It came to the 

studio, not here. It was quite ridiculous. It was just a message. Not 

typewritten that time. In capital letters. It said, "Prepare to die."' 

She laughed. There was perhaps a very faint tinge of hysteria in the 

laugh. The mirth was genuine enough. 'It was so silly,' she said. 'Of 

course one often gets crank messages, threats, things like that. I 

thought it was probably religious you know. Someone who didn't 

approve of film actresses. I just tore it up and threw it into the 

wastepaper basket.'  

 

'Did you tell anyone about it, Miss MarinaGregg?'  

 

MarinaGregg shook her head. 'No, I never said a word to anyone. As a 
matter of fact, we were having a bit of worry at the moment about 

the scene we were shooting. I just couldn't have thought of 

anything but that at the moment. Anyway, as I say, I thought it was 

either a silly joke or one of those religious cranks who write and 

disapprove of play-acting and things like that.'  

 

'And after that, was there another?'  

 

'Yes. On the day of the fкte. One of the gardeners brought it to me, I 

think. He said someone had left a note for me and was there any 

answer? I thought perhaps it had to do with the arrangements. I just 

tore it open. It said "Today will be your last day on earth." I just 

crumpled it up and said, "No answer." Then I called the man back 

and asked him who gave it to him. He said it was a man with 

spectacles on a bicycle. Well, I mean, what could you think about 



that? I thought it was more silliness. I didn't think - I didn't think for 

a moment, it was a real genuine threat.'  
 

'Where's that note now, Miss MarinaGregg?'  

 

'I've no idea. I was wearing one of those coloured Italian silk coats 

and I think, as far as I remember, that I crumpled it up and shoved it 

into the pocket of it. But it's not there now. It probably fell out.'  

 

'And you've no idea who wrote these silly notes, Miss MarinaGregg? Who 

inspired them? Not even now?'  

 

Her eyes opened widely. There was a kind of innocent wonder in 

them that he took note of. He admired it, but he did not believe in it.  

 
'How can I tell? How can I possibly tell?'  

 

'I think you might have quite a good idea, Miss MarinaGregg.'  

 

'I haven't. I assure you I haven't.'  

 

'You're a very famous person,' said Dermot. 'You've had great 

successes. Successes in your profession, and personal successes, 

too. Men have fallen in love with you, wanted to marry you, have 

married you. Women have been jealous and envied you. Men have 

been in love with you and been rebuffed by you. It's a pretty wild 

field, I agree, but I should think you must have some idea who could 

have written these notes.'  

 

'It could have been anybody.'  



 

'No, Miss MarinaGregg, it couldn't have been anybody. It could possibly 
have been one of quite a lot of people. It could be someone quite 

humble, a dresser, an electrician, a servant; or it could be someone 

among the ranks of your friends, or so-called friends. But you must 

have some idea. Some name, more than one name, perhaps, to 

suggest.'  

 

The door opened and JasonRudd  came in. MarinaGregg turned to him. 

She swept out an arm appealingly.  

 

'Jinks, darling, Mr Craddock is insisting that I must know who wrote 

those horrid notes. And I don't. You know I don't. Neither of us 

knows. We haven't got the least idea.'  

 
'Very urgent about that,' thought Craddock. 'Very urgent. Is MarinaGregg 

 afraid of what her husband might say?'  

 

JasonRudd , his eyes dark with fatigue and the scowl on his face 

deeper than usual, came over to join them. He took MarinaGregg's hand in 

his.  

 

'I know it sounds unbelievable to you, Inspector,' he said, 'but 

honestly neither MarinaGregg nor I have any idea about this business.'  

 

'So you're in the happy position of having no enemies, is that it?' 

The irony was manifest in Dermot's voice.  

 

JasonRudd  flushed a little. 'Enemies? That's a very biblical word, 

Inspector. In that sense, I can assure you, I can think of no enemies. 



People who dislike one, would like to get the better of one, would do 

a mean turn to one if they could, in malice and uncharitableness, 
yes. But it's a long step from that to putting an overdose of poison in 

a drink.'  

 

'Just now, in speaking to your wife, I asked her who could have 

written or inspired those letters. She said she didn't know, but 

when we come to the actual action, it narrows it down. Somebody 

actually put the poison in that glass. And that's a fairly limited field, 

you know.'  

 

'I saw nothing,' said JasonRudd .  

 

'I certainly didn't,' said MarinaGregg. 'Well, I mean - if I had see anyone 

putting anything in my glass, I wouldn't have drunk the stuff, would 
I?'  

 

'I can't help believing, you know,' said Dermot Craddock gently, 

'that you do know a little more than you're telling me  

 

'It's not true,' said MarinaGregg. 'Tell him that that isn't true.'  

 

'I assure you,' said JasonRudd , 'that I am completely a absolutely 

at a loss. The whole thing's fantastic. I might believe it was a joke - a 

joke that had somehow gone wrong - that had proved dangerous, 

done by a person who never dreamt that it would be dangerous...'  

 

There was a slight question in his voice, then he shook his head. 

'No. I see that idea doesn't appeal to you.'  

 



'There's one more thing I should like to ask you,' said Dermot 

Craddock. 'You remember Mr and Mrs Badcock's arrival, of course. 
They came immediately after the vicar. You greeted them, I 

understand, Miss MarinaGregg, in the same charming way as you had 

received all your guests. But I am told by an eye-witness that 

immediately after greeting them you looked over Mrs Badcock's 

shoulder and that you saw something which seemed to alarm you. 

Is that true, and if so, what was it?'  

 

MarinaGregg said quickly, 'Of course it isn't true. Alarm me - what should 

have alarmed me?'  

 

'That's what we want to know,' said Dermot Craddock patiently.'My 

witness is very insistent on the point, you know.'  

 
'Who was your witness? What did he or she say she saw?'  

 

'You were looking at the staircase,' said Dermot Craddock. 'There 

were people coming up the staircase. There was a journalist, there 

was Mr Grice and his wife, elderly residents in this place, there was 

Mr Ardwyck Fenn who had just arrived from the States and there 

was Miss Lola Brewster. Was it the sight of one of those people that 

upset you, Miss MarinaGregg?'  

 

'I tell you I wasn't upset.' She almost barked the words. 'And yet 

your attention wavered from greeting Mrs Badcock. She had said 

something to you which you left unanswered because you were 

staring past her at something else.'  

 



MarinaGregg MarinaGregg took hold on herself. She spoke quickly and 

convincingly.  
 

'I can explain, I really can. If you knew anything about acting you'd 

be able to understand quite easily. There comes a moment, even 

when you know a part well - in fact it usually happens when you do 

know a part well - when you go on with it mechanically. Smiling, 

making the proper movements and gestures, saying the words with 

the usual inflexions. But your mind isn't on it. And quite suddenly 

there's a horrible blank moment when you don't know where you 

are, where you've got to in the play, what your next lines are! Drying 

up, that's what we call it. Well, that's what happened to me. I'm not 

terribly strong, as my husband will tell you. I've had rather a 

strenuous time, and a good deal of nervous apprehension about 

this film. I wanted to make a success of this fкte and to be nice and 
pleasant and welcoming to everybody. But one does say the same 

things over and over again, mechanically, to the people who are 

always saying the same things to you. You know, how they've 

always wanted to meet you. How they once saw you outside a 

theatre in San Francisco - or travelled in a plane with you. 

Something silly really, but one has to be nice about it and say 

things. Well, as I'm telling you, one does that automatically. One 

doesn't need to think what to say because one's said it so often 

before. Suddenly, I think, a wave of tiredness came over me. My 

brain went blank. Then I realized that Mrs Badcock had been telling 

me a long story which I hadn't really heard at all, and was now 

looking at me in an eager sort of way and that I hadn't answered her 

or said any of the proper things. It was just tiredness.'  

 



'Just tiredness,' said Dermot Craddock slowly. 'You insist on that, 

Miss MarinaGregg?'  
 

'Yes, I do. I can't see why you don't believe me.'  

 

Dermot Craddock turned towards JasonRudd . 'JasonRuddRudd,' he said, 'I 

think you're more likely to understand my meaning than your wife 

is. I am concerned, very much concerned, for your wife's safety. 

There has been an attempt on her life, there have been threatening 

letters. That means, doesn't it, that there is someone who was here 

on the day of the fкte and possibly is still here, someone in very 

close touch with this house and what goes on in it. That person, 

whoever it is, may be slightly insane. It's not just a question of 

threats. Threatened men live long, as they say. The same goes for 

women. But whoever it was didn't stop at threats. A deliberate 
attempt was made to poison Miss MarinaGregg. Don't you see in the whole 

nature of things, that the attempt is bound to be repeated? There's 

only one way to achieve safety. That is to give me all the clues you 

possibly can. I don't say that you know who that person is, but I 

think that you must be able to give a guess or to have a vague idea. 

Won't you tell me the truth? Or if, which is possible, you yourself do 

not know the truth, won't you urge your wife to do so. It's in the 

interests of her own safety that I'm asking you.'  

 

JasonRudd  turned his head slowly. 'You hear what Inspector 

Craddock says, MarinaGregg,' he said. 'It's possible, as he says, that you 

may know something that I do not. If so, for God's sake, don't be 

foolish about it. If you've the least suspicion of anyone, tell it to us 

now.'  

 



'But I haven't.' Her voice rose in a wail. 'You must believe me.'  

 
'Who were you afraid of that day?' asked Dermot.  

 

'I wasn't afraid of anyone.'  

 

'Listen, Miss MarinaGregg, of the people on the stairs or coming up it, 

there were two friends whom you were surprised to see, whom you 

had not seen for a long time and whom you did not expect to see 

that day. Mr Ardwyck Fern and Miss Brewster. Had you any special 

emotions when you suddenly saw them coming up the stairs? You 

didn't know they were coming, did you?'  

 

'No, we'd no idea they were even in England,' said JasonRudd .  

 
'I was delighted,' said MarinaGregg, 'absolutely delighted!'  

 

'Delighted to see Miss Brewster?'  

 

'Well -' she shot him a quick, faintly suspicious glance.  

 

Craddock said, 'Lola Brewster was, I believe, originally married to 

your third husband Robert Truscott?'  

 

'Yes, that's so.'  

 

'He divorced her in order to marry you.'  

 

'Oh, everyone knows about that,' said MarinaGregg  impatiently. 

'You needn't think it's anything you've found out. There was a bit of 



a rumpus at the time, but there wasn't any bad feeling about it in the 

end.'  
 

'Did she make threats against you?'  

 

'Well - in a way, yes. But, oh dear, I wish I could explain. No one 

takes those sort of threats seriously. It was at a party, she'd had a 

lot of drink. She might have taken a pot-shot at me with a pistol if 

she'd had one. But luckily she didn't. All that was years ago! None 

of these things last, these emotions! They don't, really they don't. 

That's true, isn't it, JasonRudd?'  

 

'I'd say it was true enough,' said JasonRudd , 'and I can assure you, 

Mr Craddock, that Lola Brewster had no opportunity on the day of 

the fкte of poisoning my wife's drink. I was close beside her most of 
the time. The idea that Lola would suddenly, after a long period of 

friendliness, come to England, and arrive at our house all prepared 

to poison my wife's drink - why the whole idea's absurd.'  

 

'I appreciate your point of view,' said Craddock.  

 

'It's not only that, it's a matter of fact as well. She was nowhere near 

MarinaGregg's glass.'  

 

'And your other visitor - Ardwyck Fern?'  

 

There was, he thought, a very slight pause before JasonRudd  

spoke.  

 



'He's a very old friend of ours,' he said. 'We haven't se him for a 

good many years now, though we occasionally correspond. He's 
quite a big figure in American Television.'  

 

'Was he an old friend of yours too?' Dermot Craddock asked 

MarinaGregg.  

 

Her breath came rather quickly as she replied. 'Yes, oh yes. He - he 

was quite a friend of mine always, but I've rather lost sight of him of 

late years.' Then with a sudden quick rush of words, she went on, 'If 

you think that I looked up and saw Ardwyck and was frightened of 

him, it's nonsense. It's absolute nonsense. Why should I be 

frightened of him, what reason would I have to be frightened of 

him? We were great friends. I was just very, very pleased when I 

suddenly saw him. It was a delightful surprise, as I told you. Yes, a 
delightful surprise., She raised her head, looking at him, her face 

vivid and defiant.  

 

'Thank you, Miss MarinaGregg,' said Craddock quietly. 'If you should feel 

inclined at any moment to take me a little further into your 

confidence I should strongly advise you to do so.' 

 

Chapter 14 

 

Mrs Bantry was on her knees. A good day for hoeing. Nice dry soil. 

But hoeing wouldn't do everything. Thistles now, and dandelions. 

She dealt vigorously with these pests.  

 



She rose to her feet, breathless but triumphant, and looked out 

over the hedge on to the road. She was faintly surprised to see the 
dark-haired secretary whose name she couldn't remember coming 

out of the public call box that was situated near the bus stop on the 

other side of the road.  

 

What was her name now. It began with a B - or was it an R? No, 

Zielinsky, that was it. Mrs Bantry remembered just in time, as Ella 

crossed the road into the drive past the Lodge.  

 

'Good morning, Miss Zielinsky,' she called in a friendly tone.  

 

Ella Zielinsky jumped. It was not so much a jump, as a shy - the shy 

of a frightened horse. It surprised Mrs Bantry.  

 
'Good morning,' said Ella, and added quickly: 'I came down to 

telephone. There's something wrong with our line today.'  

 

Mrs Bantry felt more surprise. She wondered why Ella Zielinsky 

bothered to explain her action. She responded civilly. 'How 

annoying for you. Do come in and telephone any time you want to.'  

 

'Oh - thank you very much...' Ella was interrupted by a fit of 

sneezing.  

 

'You've got hay-fever,' said Mrs Bantry with immediate diagnosis. 

'Try weak bicarbonate of soda and water.'  

 

'Oh, that's all right. I have some very good patent stuff in an 

atomizer. Thank you all the same.'  



 

She sneezed again as she moved away, walking briskly up the 
drive.  

 

Mrs Bantry looked after her. Then her eyes returned to her garden. 

She looked at it in a dissatisfied fashion. Not a weed to be seen 

anywhere.  

 

'Othello's occupation's gone,' Mrs Bantry murmured to herself 

confusedly. 'I dare say I'm a nosy old woman but I would like to 

know if -'  

 

A moment of irresolution and then Mrs Bantry yielded to temptation. 

She was going to be a nosy old woman and the hell with it! She 

strode indoors to the telephone, lifted the receiver and dialled it. A 
brisk transatlantic voice spoke.  

 

'Gossington Hall.'  

 

'This is Mrs Bantry, at the East Lodge.'  

 

'Oh, good morning, Mrs Bantry. This is Halley Preston. I met you on 

the day of the fкte. What can I do for you?'  

 

'I thought perhaps I could do something for you. If your telephone's 

out of order -'  

 

His astonished voice interrupted her.  

 



'Our telephone out of order? There's been nothing wrong with it. 

Why did you think so?'  
 

'I must have made a mistake,' said Mrs Bantry. 'I don't always hear 

very well,' she explained unblushingly.  

 

She put the receiver back, waited a minute, then dialled once more.  

 

'Marple? Dolly here.'  

 

'Yes, Dolly. What is it?'  

 

'Well, it seems rather odd. The secretary woman was dialling from 

the public call box in the road. She took the trouble to explain to me 

quite unnecessarily that she was doing so because the line at 
Gossington Hall was out of order. But I've rung up there, and it 

isn't...'  

 

She paused, and waited for intelligence to pronounce.  

 

'In-deed,' said Miss Marple thoughtfully. 'Interesting.'  

 

'For what reason, do you think?'  

 

'Well, clearly, she didn't want to be overheard -'  

 

'Exactly.'  

 

'And there might be quite a number of reasons for that.'  

 



'Yes.'  

 
'Interesting,' said Miss Marple again. 

 

II 

 

Nobody could have been more ready to talk than Donald McNeil. He 

was an amiable red-headed young man. He greeted Dermot 

Craddock with pleasure and curiosity.  

 

'How are you getting along,' he asked cheerfully, 'got any little 

special tit-bit for me?'  

 

'Not as yet. Later perhaps.'  

 
'Stalling as usual. You're all the same. Affable oysters! Haven't you 

come to the stage yet of inviting someone to come and "assist you 

in your inquiries"?'  

 

'I've come to you,' said Dermot Craddock with a grin.  

 

'Is there a nasty double entendre in that remark? Are you really 

suspicious that I murdered Heather Badcock and do you think I did 

it in mistake for MarinaGregg  or that I meant to murder Heather 

Badcock all the time?'  

 

'I haven't suggested anything,' said Craddock.  

 



'No, no, you wouldn't do that, would you? You'd be very correct. All 

right. Let's go into it. I was there. I had opportunity but had I any 
motive? Ah, that's what you'd like to know. What was my motive?'  

 

'I haven't been able to find one so far,' said Craddock.  

 

'That's very gratifying. I feel safer.'  

 

'I'm just interested in what you may have seen that day.'  

 

'You've had that already. The local police had that straight away. 

It's humiliating. There I was on the scene of a murder. I practically 

saw the murder committed, must have done, and yet I've no idea 

who did it. I'm ashamed to confess that the first I knew about it was 

seeing the poor, dear woman sitting on a chair gasping for breath 
and then pegging out. Of course it made a very good eye-witness 

account. It was a good scoop for me - and all that. But I'll confess to 

you that I feel humiliated that I don't know more. I ought to know 

more. And you can't kid me that the dose was meant for Heather 

Badcock. She was a nice woman who talked too much, but nobody 

gets murdered for that - unless of course they give away secrets. 

But I don't think anybody would ever have told Heather Badcock a 

secret. She wasn't the kind of woman who'd have been interested in 

other people's secrets. My view of her is of a woman who invariably 

talked about herself.'  

 

'That seems to be the generally accepted view,' agreed Craddock.  

 

'So we come to the famous MarinaGregg . I'm sure there are lots of 

wonderful motives for murdering MarinaGregg. Envy and jealousy and 



love tangles - all the stuff of drama. But who did it? Someone with a 

screw loose, I presume. There! You've had my valuable opinion. Is 
that what you wanted?'  

 

'Not that alone. I understand that you arrived and came up the 

stairs about the same time as the vicar and the mayor.'  

 

'Quite correct. But that wasn't the first time I'd arrived. I'd been 

there earlier.'  

 

'I didn't know that.'  

 

'Yes. I was on a kind of roving commission, you know, going here 

and there. I had a photographer with me. I'd gone down to take a 

few local shots of the mayor arriving and throwing a hoopla and 
putting in a peg for buried treasure and that kind of thing. Then I 

went back up again, not so much on the job, as to get a drink or 

two. The drink was good.'  

 

'I see. Now can you remember who else was on the staircase when 

you went up?'  

 

'Margot Bence from London was there with her camera.'  

 

'You know her well?'  

 

'Oh I just run against her quite often. She's a clever girl, who makes 

a success of her stuff. She takes all the fashionable things - First 

Nights, Gala Performances - specializes in photographs from 

unusual angles. Arty! She was in a corner of the half landing very 



well placed for taking anyone who came up and for taking the 

greetings going on at the top. Lola Brewster was just ahead of me 
on the stairs. Didn't know her at first. She's got a new rust-red hair-

do. The very latest Fiji Islander type. Last time I saw her it was lank 

waves falling round her face and chin in a nice shade of auburn. 

There was a big dark man with her, American. I don't know who he 

was but he looked important.'  

 

'Did you look at MarinaGregg  herself at all as you were coming up?'  

 

'Yes, of course I did.'  

 

'She didn't look upset or as though she'd had a shock or was 

frightened?'  

 
'It's odd you should say that. I did think for a moment or two she 

was going to faint.'  

 

'I see,' said Craddock thoughtfully. 'Thanks. There's nothing else 

you'd like to tell me?'  

 

McNeil gave him a wide innocent stare.  

 

'What could there be?'  

 

'I don't trust you,' said Craddock.  

 

'But you seem quite sure I didn't do it. Disappointing. Suppose I turn 

out to be her first husband. Nobody knows who he was except that 

he was so insignificant that even his name's been forgotten.'  



 

Dermot grinned.  
 

'Married from your prep school?' he asked. 'Or possibly in rompers! 

I must hurry. I've got a train to catch.' 

 

III 

 

There was a neatly docketed pile of papers on Craddock's desk at 

New Scotland Yard. He gave a perfunctory glance through them, 

then threw a question over his shoulder.  

 

'Where's Lola Brewster staying?'  

 

'At the Savoy, sir. Suite 1800. She's expecting you.  
 

'And Ardwyck Fern?'  

 

'He's at the Dorchester. First floor, 190."  

 

He picked up some cablegrams and read through them again 

before shoving them into his pocket. He smiled a moment to himself 

over the last one. 'Don't say I don't do my stuff, Aunt Marple,' he 

murmured under his breath.  

 

He went out and made his way to the Savoy.  

 



In Lola Brewster's suite Lola went out of her way to welcome him 

effusively. With the report he had just read in his mind, he studied 
her carefully. Quite a beauty still, he thought, in a lush kind of way, 

what you might call a trifle overblown, perhaps, but they still liked 

them that way. A completely different type, of course, from MarinaGregg 

. The amenities over, Lola pushed back her Fiji Islander hair, 

drew her generous lipsticked mouth into a provocative pout, and 

flickering blue eyelids over wide brown eyes, said:  

 

'Have you come to ask me a lot more horrible questions? Like that 

local inspector did.'  

 

'I hope they won't be too horrible, Miss Brewster.'  

 

'Oh, but I'm sure they will be, and I'm sure the whole thing must 
have been some terrible mistake.'  

 

'Do you really think so?'  

 

'Yes. It's all such nonsense. Do you really mean that someone tried 

to poison MarinaGregg? Who on earth would poison MarinaGregg? She's an 

absolute sweetie, you know. Everybody loves her.'  

 

'Including you?'  

 

'I've always been devoted to MarinaGregg.'  

 

'Oh come now, Miss Brewster, wasn't there a little trouble about 

eleven or twelve years ago?'  

 



'Oh that.' Lola waved it away. 'I was terribly nervy and distraught, 

and Rob and I had been having the most frightful quarrels. We were 
neither of us normal at the moment. MarinaGregg just fell wildly in love 

with him and rushed him off his feet, the poor pet.'  

 

'And you minded very much?'  

 

'Well, I thought I did, Inspector. Of course I see now it was one of 

the best things that ever happened for me. I was really worried 

about the children, you know. Breaking up our home. I'm afraid I'd 

already realized that Rob and I were incompatible. I expect you 

know I got married to Eddie Groves as soon as the divorce went 

through? I think really I'd been in love with him for a long time, but 

of course I didn't want to break up my marriage, because of the 

children. It's so important, isn't it, that children should have a 
home?'  

 

'Yet people say that actually you were terribly upset.'  

 

'Oh, people always say things,' said Lola vaguely.  

 

'You said quite a lot, didn't you, Miss Brewster? You went about 

threatening to shoot MarinaGregg , or so I understand.'  

 

'I've told you one says things. One's supposed to say things like 

that. Of course I wouldn't really shoot anyone.'  

 

'In spite of taking a pot-shot at Eddie Groves some few years later?'  

 



'Oh, that was because we'd had an argument,' said Lola. 'I lost my 

temper.'  
 

'I have it on very good authority, Miss Brewster, that you said - and 

these are your exact words or so I'm told,' (he read from a note-

book) - 'That bitch needn't think she'll get away with it. If I don't 

shoot her now I'll wait and get her in some other way. I don't care 

how long I wait, years if need be, but I'll get even with her in the 

end.'  

 

'Oh, I'm sure I never said anything of the kind,' Lola laughed.  

 

'I'm sure, Miss Brewster, that you did.'  

 

'People exaggerate so.' A charming smile broke over her face. 'I 
was just mad at the moment, you know,' she murmured 

confidentially. 'One says all sorts of things when one's mad with 

people. But you don't really think I'd wait fourteen years and come 

across to England, and look up MarinaGregg and drop some deadly 

poison into her cocktail glass within three minutes of seeing her 

again?'  

 

Dermot Craddock didn't really think so. It seemed to him wildly 

improbable. He merely said:  

 

'I'm only pointing out to you, Miss Brewster, that there had been 

threats in the past and that MarinaGregg  was certainly startled and 

frightened to see someone who came up the stairs that day. 

Naturally one feels that that someone must have been you.'  

 



'But darling MarinaGregg was delighted to see me! She kissed me and 

exclaimed how wonderful it was. Oh really, Inspector, I do think 
you're being very, very silly.'  

 

'In fact, you were all one big happy family?'  

 

'Well, that's really much more true than all the things you've been 

thinking.'  

 

'And you've no ideas that could help us in any way? No ideas who 

might have killed her?'  

 

'I tell you nobody would have wanted to kill MarinaGregg. She's a very silly 

woman anyway. Always making terrible fusses about her health, 

and changing her mind and wanting this, that and the other, and 
when she's got it being dissatisfied with it! I can't think why people 

are as fond of her as they are. JasonRudd's always been absolutely mad 

about her. What that man has to put up with! But there it is. 

Everybody puts up with MarinaGregg, puts themselves out for her. Then 

she gives them a sad, sweet and thanks them! And apparently that 

makes them feel that all the trouble is worthwhile. I really don't 

know how she does it. You'd better put the idea that somebody 

wanted to kill right out of your head.'  

 

'I should like to,' said Dermot Craddock. 'Unfortunately I can't put it 

out of my head because you see, it happened.'  

 

'What do you mean, it happened, nobody has killed MarinaGregg, have 

they?'  

 



'No. But the attempt was made.'  

 
'I don't believe it for a moment! I expect whoever it was meant to kill 

the other woman all the time - the one who was killed. I expect 

someone comes into money when she dies.'  

 

'She hadn't any money, Miss Brewster.'  

 

'Oh well, there was some other reason. Anyway, I shouldn't worry 

about MarinaGregg if I were you. MarinaGregg is always all right!'  

 

'Is she? She doesn't look a very happy woman to me.'  

 

'Oh, that's because she makes such a song and dance about 

everything. Unhappy love affairs. Not being able to have any 
children.'  

 

'She adopted some children, didn't she?' said Dermot with a lively 

remembrance of Miss Marple's urgent voice.  

 

'I believe she did once. It wasn't a great success I believe. She does 

these impulsive things and then wishes she hadn't.'  

 

'What happened to the children she adopted?'  

 

'I've no idea. They just sort of vanished after a bit. She got tired of 

them, I suppose, like everything else.'  

 

'I see,' said Dermot Craddock. 



 

IV 

 

Next - the Dorchester. Suite 190.  

 

'Well, Chief-Inspector -' Ardwyck Fenn looked down at the card in 

his hand.  

 

'Craddock.'  

 

'What can I do for you?'  

 

'I hope you won't mind if I ask you a few questions.'  

 

'Not at all. It's this business at Much Benham. No - what's the actual 
name, St Mary Mead?'  

 

'Yes. That's right. Gossington Hall.'  

 

'Can't think what JasonRudd  wanted to buy a place like that for. 

Plenty of good Georgian houses in England - or even Queen Anne. 

Gossington Hall is a purely Victorian mansion. Where's the 

attraction in that, I wonder?'  

 

'Oh, there's some attraction - for some people, that is, in Victorian 

stability.'  

 



'Stability? Well, perhaps you've got something there. MarinaGregg, I 

suppose, had a feeling for stability. It's a thing she never had 
herself, poor girl, so I suppose that's why she always covets it. 

Perhaps this place will satisfy her for a bit.'  

 

'You know her well, Mr Fenn?'  

 

Ardwyck Fern shrugged his shoulders.  

 

'Well? I don't know that I'd say that. I've known her over a long 

period of years. Known her off and on, that is to say.'  

 

Craddock looked at him appraisingly. A dark man, heavily built, 

shrewd eyes behind thick glasses, heavy jowl and chin, Ardwyck 

Fenn went on:  
 

'The idea is, I gather, from what I read in the newspapers, that this 

Mrs Whatever-her-name-was, was poisoned by mistake. That the 

dose was intended for MarinaGregg. Is that right?'  

 

'Yes. That's it. The dose was in MarinaGregg 's cocktail. Mrs 

Badcock spilt hers and MarinaGregg handed over her drink to her.'  

 

'Well that seems pretty conclusive. I really can't think, though, who 

would want to poison MarinaGregg. Especially as Lynette Brown wasn't 

there.'  

 

'Lynette Brown?' Craddock looked slightly at sea.  

 



Ardwyck Fenn smiled. 'If MarinaGregg breaks this contract, throws up the 

part - Lynette will get it and it would mean a good deal to Lynette to 
get it. But for all that, I don't imagine she'd send some emissary 

along with poison. Much too melodramatic an idea.'  

 

'It seems a little far-fetched,' said Dermot dryly.  

 

'Ah, you'd be surprised what women will do when they're 

ambitious,' said Ardwyck Fenn. 'Mind you, death mayn't have been 

intended. It may have been just to give her a fright - Enough to 

knock her out but not to finish her.'  

 

Craddock shook his head. 'It wasn't a borderline dose,' he said.  

 

'People make mistakes in doses, quite big ones.'  
 

'Is this really your theory?'  

 

'Oh no, it isn't. It was only a suggestion. I've no theory. I was only an 

innocent bystander.'  

 

'Was MarinaGregg  very surprised to see you?'  

 

'Yes, it was a complete surprise to her.' He laughed amusedly. 'Just 

couldn't believe her eyes when she saw me coming up the stairs. 

She gave me a very nice welcome, I must say.'  

 

'You hadn't seen her for a long time?'  

 

'Not for four or five years, I should say.'  



 

'And some years before that there was a time when you and she 
were very close friends, I believe?'  

 

There was very little change in the voice but there was something 

there that had not been there before. A hint of steel, of menace. 

Dermot felt suddenly that this man would be a very ruthless 

opponent.  

 

'It would be as well, I think,' said Ardwyck Fenn, 'that you said 

exactly what you do mean.'  

 

"I'm quite prepared to do so, Mr Fern. I have to inquire into the past 

relations of everyone who was there on that day with MarinaGregg . 

It seems to have been a matter of common gossip that at the time I 
have just referred to, you were wildly in love with MarinaGregg .'  

 

Ardwyck Fenn shrugged his shoulders.  

 

'One has these infatuations, Inspector. Fortunately, they pass.'  

 

'It is said that she encouraged you and that later she turned you 

down and that you resented the fact.'  

 

'It is said - it is said! I suppose you read all that in Confidential?'  

 

'It has been told me by quite well informed and sensible people.'  

 

Ardwyck Fern threw back his head, showing the bull-like line of his 

neck.  



 

'I had a yen for her at one time, yes,' he admitted. 'She was a 
beautiful and attractive woman and still is. To say that I ever 

threatened her is going a little too far. I'm never pleased to be 

thwarted, Chief-Inspector, and most people who thwart me tend to 

be sorry that they have done so. But that principle applies mainly in 

my business life.'  

 

'You did, I believe, use your influence to have her dropped from a 

picture that she was making?'  

 

Fenn shrugged his shoulders.  

 

'She was unsuitable for the role. There was conflict between her 

and the director. I had money in that picture and I had no intention 
of jeopardizing it. It was, I assure you, purely a business 

transaction.'  

 

'But perhaps MarinaGregg  did not think so?'  

 

'Oh, naturally she did not think so. She would always think that 

anything like that was personal.'  

 

'She actually told certain friends of hers that she was afraid of you, I 

believe?'  

 

'Did she? How childish. I expect she enjoyed the sensation.'  

 

'You think there was no need for her to be afraid of you?'  

 



'Of course not. Whatever personal disappointment I might have 

had, I soon put it behind me. I've always gone on the principle that 
where women are concerned there are as good fish in the sea as 

ever came out of it.'  

 

'A very satisfactory way to go through life, Mr Fenn.'  

 

'Yes, I think it is.'  

 

'You have a wide knowledge of the moving picture world?'  

 

'I have financial interests in it.'  

 

'And therefore you are bound to know a lot about it?'  

 
'Perhaps.'  

 

'You are a man whose judgement would be worth listening to. Can 

you suggest to me any person who is likely to have such a deep 

grudge against MarinaGregg  that they would be willing to do away 

with her?'  

 

'Probably a dozen,' said Ardwyck Fern, 'that is to say, if they hadn't 

got to do anything about it personally. If it was mere matter of 

pressing a button in a wall, I dare say there'd be a lot of willing 

fingers.'  

 

'You were there that day. You saw her and talked to her. Do you 

think that amongst any of the people who were around you in that 

brief space of time - from when you arrived to the moment when 



Heather Badcock died - do you think that amongst them you can 

suggest - only suggest, mind you, I'm asking you for nothing more 
than a guess - anyone who might poison MarinaGregg ?'  

 

'I wouldn't like to say,' said Ardwyck Fenn.  

 

'That means that you have some idea?'  

 

'It means that I have nothing to say on that subject. And that, Chief-

Inspector Craddock, is all you'll get out of me.' 

 

Chapter 15 

 

Dermot Craddock looked down at the last name and address he 

had written down in his note-book. The telephone number had been 
rung twice for him but there had been no response. He tried it now 

once more. He shrugged his shoulders, got up and decided to go 

and see for himself.  

 

Margot Bence's studio was in a cul-de-sac off the Tottenharn Court 

Road. Beyond the name on a plate on the side of a door, there was 

little to identify it, and certainly no form of advertising. Craddock 

groped his way to the first floor. There was a large notice here 

painted in black on a white board 'Margot Bence, Personality 

Photographer. Please enter.'  

 

Craddock entered. There was a small waiting-room but nobody in 

charge of it. He stood there hesitating, then cleared his throat in a 



loud and theatrical manner. Since that drew no attention he raised 

his voice.  
 

'Anybody here?'  

 

He heard a flap of slippers behind a velvet curtain, the curtain was 

pushed aside and a young man with exuberant hair and a pink and 

white face, peered round it.  

 

'Terribly sorry, my dear,' he said. 'I didn't hear you. I had an 

absolutely new idea and I was just trying it out.'  

 

He pushed the velvet curtain farther aside and Craddock followed 

him into an inner room. This proved to be unexpectedly large. It was 

clearly the working studio. There were cameras, lights, arc-lights, 
piles of drapery, screens on wheels.  

 

'Such a mess,' said the young man, who was almost as willowy as 

Hailey Preston. 'But one finds it very hard to work, I think, unless 

one does get into a mess. Now what were you wanting to see us 

about?'  

 

'I wanted to see Miss Margot Bence.'  

 

'Ah, Margot. Now what a pity. If you'd been half an hour earlier 

you'd have found her here. She's gone off to produce some 

photographs of models for Fashion Dream. You should have rung 

up, you know, to make an appointment. Margot's terribly busy these 

days.'  

 



'I did ring up. There was no reply.'  

 
'Of course,' said the young man. 'We took the receiver off. I 

remember now. It disturbed us.' He smoothed down a kind of lilac 

smock that he was wearing. 'Can I do anything for you? Make an 

appointment? I do a lot of Margot's business arrangements for her. 

You wanted to arrange for some photography somewhere? Private 

or business?'  

 

'From that point of view, neither,' said Dermot Craddock. He 

handed his card to the young man.  

 

'How perfectly rapturous,' said the young man. 'C.I.D.! I believe, you 

know, I've seen pictures of you. Are you one of the Big Four or the 

Big Five, or is it perhaps the Big Six nowadays? There's so much 
crime about, they'd have to increase the numbers, wouldn't they? 

Oh dear, is that disrespectful? I'm afraid it is. I didn't mean to be 

disrespectful at all. Now, what do you want Margot for - not to 

arrest her, I hope.'  

 

'I just wanted to ask her one or two questions.'  

 

'She doesn't do indecent photographs or anything like that,' said 

the young man anxiously. 'I hope nobody's been telling you any 

stories of that kind because it isn't true. Margot's very artistic. She 

does a lot of stage work and studio work. But her studies are 

terribly, terribly pure - almost prudish, I'd say.'  

 



'I can tell you quite simply why I want to speak to Miss Bence,' said 

Dermot. 'She was recently an eye-witness of a crime that took place 
near Much Benham, at a village called St Mary Mead.'  

 

'Oh, my dear, of course! I know about that. Margot came back and 

told me all about it. Hemlock in the cocktails, wasn't it? Something 

of that kind. So bleak it sounded! But all mixed up with the St John 

Ambulance which doesn't seem so bleak, does it? But haven't you 

already asked Margot questions about that - or was it somebody 

else?'  

 

'One always finds there are more questions, as the case goes on,' 

said Dermot.  

 

'You mean it develops. Yes, I can quite see that. Murder develops. 
Yes, like a photograph, isn't it?'  

 

'It's very much like photography really,' said Dermot. 'Quite a good 

comparison of yours.'  

 

'Well, it's very nice of you to say so, I'm sure. Now about Margot. 

Would you like to get hold of her right away?'  

 

'If you can help me to do so, yes.'  

 

'Well, at the moment,' said the young man, consulting his watch, 'at 

the moment she'll be outside Keats' house at Hampstead Heath. My 

car's outside. Shall I run you up there?'  

 

'That would be very kind of you, Mr -'  



 

'Jethroe,' said the young man, 'Johnny Jethroe.'  
 

As they went down the stairs Dermot asked: 'Why Keats' house?'  

 

'Well, you know we don't pose fashion photographs in the studio 

any more. We like them to seem natural, blown about by the wind. 

And if possible some rather unlikely background. You know, an 

Ascot frock against Wandsworth Prison, or a frivolous suit outside 

a poet's house.'  

 

Mr Jethroe drove rapidly but skilfully up Tottenham Court Road, 

through Camden Town and finally to the neighbourhood of 

Hampstead Heath. On the pavement near Keats' house a pretty 

little scene was being enacted. A slim girl, wearing diaphanous 
organdie, was standing clutching an immense black hat. On her 

knees, a little way behind her, a second girl was holding the first 

girl's skirt well pulled back so that it clung around her knees and 

legs. In a deep hoarse voice a girl with a camera was directing 

operations.  

 

'For goodness' sake, Marple, get your behind down. It's showing 

behind her right knee. Get down flatter. That's it. No, more to the 

left. That's right. Now you're masked by the bush. That'll do. Hold it. 

We'll have one more. Both hands on the back of the hat this time. 

Head up. Good - now turn round, Elsie. Bend over. More. Bend! 

Bend, you've got to pick up that cigarette case. That's right. That's 

heaven! Got it! Now move over to the left. Same pose, only just turn 

your head over your shoulder. So.'  

 



'I can't see what you want to go taking photographs of my behind 

for,' said the girl called Elsie rather sulkily.  
 

'It's a lovely behind, dear. It looks smashing,' said the 

photographer. 'And when you turn your head your chin comes up 

like the rising moon over a mountain. I don't think we need bother 

with any more.'  

 

'Hi - Margot,' said Mr Jethroe.  

 

She turned her head. 'Oh, it's you. What are you doing here?'  

 

'I brought someone along to see you. Chief-Inspector Craddock, 

C.I.D.'  

 
The girl's eyes turned swiftly on to Dermot. He thought they had a 

wary, searching look but that, as he well knew, was nothing 

extraordinary. It was a fairly common reaction to detective-

inspectors. She was a thin girl, all elbows and angles, but was an 

interesting shape for all that. A heavy curtain of black hair fell down 

either side of her face. She looked dirty as well as sallow and not 

particularly prepossessing, to his eyes. But he acknowledged that 

there was character there. She raised her eyebrows which were 

slightly raised by art already and remarked:  

 

'And what can I do for you, Detective-Inspector Craddock?'  

 

'How do you do, Miss Bence. I wanted to ask you if you would be so 

kind as to answer a few questions about that very unfortunate 



business at Gossington Hall, near Much Benham. You went there, if 

I remember, to take some photographs.'  
 

The girl nodded. 'Of course. I remember quite well.' She shot him a 

quick searching look. 'I didn't see you there. Surely it was 

somebody else. Inspector - Inspector -'  

 

'Inspector Cornish?' said Dermot.  

 

'That's right.'  

 

'We were called in later.'  

 

'You're from Scotland Yard?'  

 
'Yes.'  

 

'You butted in and took over from the local people. Is that it?'  

 

'Well, it isn't quite a question of butting in, you know. It's up to the 

Chief Constable of the County to decide whether he wants to keep it 

in his own hands or whether he thinks it'll be better handled by us.'  

 

'What makes him decide?'  

 

'It very often turns on whether the case has a local background or 

whether it's a more - universal one. Sometimes, perhaps, an 

international one.'  

 

'And he decided, did he, that this was an international one?'  



 

'Transatlantic, perhaps, would be a better word.'  
 

'They've been hinting that in the papers, haven't they? Hinting that 

the killer, whoever he was, was out to get MarinaGregg  and got 

some wretched local woman by mistake. Is that true or is it a bit of 

publicity for their film?'  

 

'I'm afraid there isn't much doubt about it, Miss Bence.'  

 

'What do you want to ask me? Have I got to come to Scotland Yard?'  

 

He shook his head. 'Not unless you like. We'll go back to your studio 

if you prefer.'  

 
'All right, let's do that. My car's just up the street.'  

 

She walked rapidly along the footpath. Dermot went with her. 

Jethroe called after them.  

 

'So long darling, I won't butt in. I'm sure you and the Inspector are 

going to talk big secrets.' He joined the two models on the 

pavement and began an animated discussion with them.  

 

Margot got into the car, unlocked the door on the other side, and 

Dermot Craddock got in beside her. She said nothing at all during 

the drive back to Tottenham Court Road. She turned down the cul-

de-sac and at the bottom of it drove through an open doorway.  

 



'Got my own parking place here,' she remarked. 'It's a furniture 

depository place really, but they rent me a bit of space. Parking a 
car is one of the big headaches in London, as you probably know 

only too well, though I don't suppose you deal with traffic, do you?'  

 

'No, that's not one of my troubles.'  

 

'I should think murder would be infinitely preferable,' said Margot 

Bence.  

 

She led the way back to the studio, motioned him to a chair, offered 

him a cigarette and sank down on the large pouffe opposite him. 

From behind the curtain of dark hair she looked at him in a sombre 

questioning way.  

 
'Shoot, stranger,' she said.  

 

'You were taking photographs on the occasion of this death, I 

understand.'  

 

'Yes.'  

 

'You'd been engaged professionally?'  

 

'Yes. They wanted someone to do a few specialized shots. I do quite 

a lot of that stuff. I do some work for film studios sometimes, but 

this time I was just taking photographs of the fкte, and afterwards a 

few shots of special people being greeted by MarinaGregg  and 

JasonRudd . Local notabilities or other personalities. That sort of 

thing.'  



 

'Yes. I understand that. You had your camera on the stairs, I 
understand?'  

 

'A part of the time, yes. I got a very good angle from there. You get 

people coming up the stairs below you and you could swivel round 

and get MarinaGregg shaking hands with them. You could get a lot of 

different angles without having to move much.'  

 

'I know, of course, that you answered some questions at the time as 

to whether you'd seen anything unusual, anything that might be 

helpful. They were general questions.'  

 

'Have you got more specialized ones?'  

 
'A little more specialized, I think. You had a good view of MarinaGregg 

 from where you were standing?'  

 

She nodded. 'Excellent.'  

 

'And of JasonRudd ?'  

 

'Ocassionally. But he was moving about more. Drinks and things 

and introducing people to one another. The locals to the celebrities. 

That kind of thing, I should imagine. I didn't see this Mrs Baddeley -'  

 

'Badcock.'  

 

'Sorry, Badcock. I didn't see her drink the fatal draught or anything 

like that. In fact I don't think I really know which she was.'  



 

'Do you remember the arrival of the mayor?'  
 

'Oh, yes. I remember the mayor all right. He had on his chain and 

his robes of office. I got one of him coming up the stairs - a close-up 

- rather a cruel profile, and then I got him shaking hands with 

MarinaGregg.'  

 

'Then you can fix that time at least in your mind. Mrs Badcock and 

her husband came up the stairs to MarinaGregg  immediately in 

front of him.'  

 

She shook her head. 'Sorry. I still don't remember her.'  

 

'That doesn't matter so much. I presume that you had a pretty good 
view of MarinaGregg  and that you had your eyes on her and were 

pointing the camera at her fairly often.'  

 

'Quite right. Most of the time. I'd wait till I got just the right moment.'  

 

'Do you know a man called Ardwyck Fenn by sight?'  

 

'Oh yes. I know him well enough. Television network - films too?  

 

'Did you take a photograph of him?'  

 

'Yes. I got him coming up with Lola Brewster.'  

 

'That would be just after the mayor?'  

 



She thought a minute then agreed. 'Yes, about then.'  

 
'Did you notice that about that time MarinaGregg  seemed to feel 

suddenly ill? Did you notice any unusual expression on her face?'  

 

Margot Bence leant forward, opened a cigarette box and took out a 

cigarette. She lit it. Although she had not answered Dermot did not 

press her. He waited, wondering what it was she was turning over 

in her mind. She said at last, abruptly:  

 

'Why do you ask me that?'  

 

'Because it's a question to which I am very anxious to have an 

answer - a reliable answer.'  

 
'Do you think my answer's likely to be reliable?'  

 

'Yes I do, as a matter of fact. You must have the habit of watching 

people's faces very closely, waiting for certain expressions, certain 

propitious moments.'  

 

She nodded her head.  

 

'Did you see anything of that kind?'  

 

'Somebody else saw it too, did they?'  

 

'Yes. More than one person, but it's been described rather 

differently.'  

 



'How did the other people describe it?'  

 
'One person has told me that she was taken faint.'  

 

Margot Bence shook her head slowly.  

 

'Someone else said that she was startled.' He paused a moment 

then went on, 'and somebody else describes her as having a frozen 

look on her face.'  

 

'Frozen,' said Margot Bence thoughtfully.  

 

'Do you agree to that last statement?'  

 

'I don't know. Perhaps.'  
 

'It was put rather more fancifully still,' said Dermot. 'In the words of 

the late poet, Tennyson. "The mirror crack'd from side to side: 'The 

doom has come upon me,' cried the Lady of Shalott."'  

 

'There wasn't any mirror,' said Margot Bence, 'but if there had been 

it might have cracked.' She got up abruptly. 'Wait,' she said. 'I'll do 

something better than describe it to you. I'll show you.'  

 

She pushed aside the curtain at the far end and disappeared for 

some moments. He could hear her uttering impatient mutterings 

under her breath.  

 

'What hell it is,' she said as she emerged again, 'one never can find 

things when one wants them. I've got it now though.'  



 

She came across to him and put a glossy print into his hand. He 
looked down at it. It was a very good photograph of MarinaGregg . 

Her hand was clasped in the hand of a woman standing in front of 

her, and therefore with her back to the camera. But MarinaGregg  

was not looking at the woman. Her eyes stared not quite into the 

camera but slightly obliquely to the left. The interesting thing to 

Dermot Craddock was that the face expressed nothing whatever. 

There was no fear on it, no pain. The woman portrayed there was 

staring at something, something she saw, and the emotion it 

aroused in her was so great that she was phsyically unable to 

express it by any kind of facial expression. Dermot Craddock had 

seen such a look once on a man's face, a man who a second later 

had been shot dead...  

 
'Satisfied?' asked Margot Bence.  

 

Craddock gave a deep sigh. 'Yes, thank you. It's hard, you know, to 

make up one's mind if witnesses are exaggerating, if they are 

imagining they see things. But that's not so in this case. There was 

something to see and she saw it.' He asked, 'Can I keep this 

picture?'  

 

'Oh, yes you can have the print. I've got the negative.'  

 

'You didn't send it to the Press?'  

 

Margot Bence shook her head.  

 



'I rather wonder why you didn't. After all, it's rather a dramatic 

photograph. Some paper might have paid a good price for it.'  
 

'I wouldn't care to do that,' said Margot Bence. 'If you look into 

somebody's soul by accident, you feel a bit embarrassed about 

cashing in.'  

 

'Did you know MarinaGregg  at all?'  

 

'No.'  

 

'You come from the States, don't you?'  

 

'I was born in England. I was trained in America though. I came over 

here, oh, about three years ago.'  
 

Dermot Craddock nodded. He had known the answers to his 

questions. They had been waiting for him among the other lists of 

information on his office table. The girl seemed straightforward 

enough. He asked:  

 

'Where did you train?'  

 

'Reingarden Studios. I was with Andrew Quilp for a time. He taught 

me a lot.'  

 

'Reingarden Studios and Andrew Quilp.' Dermot Craddock was 

suddenly alert. The names struck a chord of remembrance.  

 

'You lived in Seven Springs, didn't you?'  



 

She looked amused.  
 

'You seem to know a lot about me. Have you been checking up?'  

 

'You're a very well-known photographer, Miss Bence. There have 

been articles written about you, you know. Why did you come to 

England?'  

 

She shrugged her shoulders.  

 

'Oh, I like a change. Besides as I tell you. I was born in England 

although I went to the States as a child.'  

 

'Quite a young child, I think.'  
 

'Five years old if you're interested.'  

 

'I am interested. I think, Miss Bence, you could tell me a little more 

than you have done.'  

 

Her face hardened. She stared at him.  

 

'What do you mean by that?'  

 

Dermot Craddock looked at her and risked it. It wasn't much to go 

on. Reingarden Studios and Andrew Quilp and the name of one 

town. But he felt rather as if old Miss Marple were at his shoulder 

egging him on.  

 



'I think you knew MarinaGregg  better than you say.'  

 
She laughed. 'Prove it. You're imagining things.'  

 

'Am I? I don't think I am. And it could be proved, you know, with a 

little time and care. Come now, Miss Bence, hadn't you better admit 

the truth? Admit that MarinaGregg  adopted you as a child and that 

you lived with her for four years.'  

 

She drew her breath in sharply with a hiss.  

 

'You nosy bastard!' she said.  

 

It startled him a little, it was such a contrast to her former manner. 

She got up, shaking her black head of hair.  
 

'All right, all right, it's true enough! Yes MarinaGregg  took me over 

to America with her. My mother had eight kids. She lived in a slum 

somewhere. She was one of hundreds of people, I suppose, who 

wrote to any film actress that they happen to see or hear about, 

spilling a hard luck story, begging her to adopt the child a mother 

couldn't give advantages to. Oh, it's such a sickening business, all 

of it.'  

 

'There were three of you,' said Dermot. 'Three children adopted at 

different times from different places.'  

 

'That's right. Me and Rod and Angus. Angus was older than I was, 

Rod was practically a baby. We had a wonderful life. Oh, a 

wonderful life! All the advantages!' Her voice rose mockingly. 



'Clothes and cars and a wonderful house to live in and people to 

look after us, good schooling and teaching, and delicious food. 
Everything piled on! And she herself, our "Mom." "Mom" in inverted 

commas, playing her part, crooning over us, being photographed 

with us! Ah, such a pretty sentimental picture.'  

 

'But she really wanted children,' said Dermot Craddock. 'That was 

real enough, wasn't it? It wasn't just a publicity stunt.'  

 

'Oh, perhaps. Yes, I think that was true. She wanted children. But 

she didn't want us! Not really. It was just a glorious bit of play-

acting. "My family." "So lovely to have a family of my own." And Izzy 

let her do it. He ought to have known better.'  

 

'Izzy was Isidore Wright?'  
 

'Yes, her third husband or her fourth, I forget which. He was a 

wonderful man really. He understood her, I think, and he was 

worried sometimes about us. He was kind to us, but he didn't 

pretend to be a father. He didn't feel like a father. He only cared 

really about his own writing. I've read some of his things since. 

They're sordid and rather cruel, but they're powerful. I think people 

will call him a great writer one day.'  

 

'And this went on until when?'  

 

Margot Bence's smile curved suddenly. 'Until she got sick of that 

particular bit of play-acting. No, that's not quite true... She found 

she was going to have a child of her own.'  

 



She laughed with sudden bitterness. 'Then we'd had it! We weren't 

wanted any more. We'd done very well as little stopgaps, but she 
didn't care a damn about us really, not a damn. Oh, she pensioned 

us off very prettily. With a home and a foster-mother and money for 

our education and a nice little sum to start us off in the world. 

Nobody can say that she didn't behave correctly and handsomely. 

But she'd never wanted us at all, she wanted was a child of her 

own.'  

 

'You can't blame her for that,' said Dermot gently.  

 

'I don't blame her for wanting a child of her own, no! But what about 

us? She took us away from our own parents, from the place where 

we belonged. My mother sold me for a mess of pottage, if you like, 

but she didn't sell me for advantage to herself. She sold me 
because she was a damn' silly woman who thought I'd get 

"advantages" and "education" and have a wonderful life. She 

thought she was doing the best for me. Best for me? If she only 

knew.'  

 

'You're still very bitter, I see.'  

 

'No, I'm not bitter now. I've got over that. I'm bitter because I'm 

remembering, because I've gone back to those days. We were all 

pretty bitter.'  

 

'All of you?'  

 

'Well, not Rod. Rod never cared about anything. Besides he was 

rather small. But Angus felt like I did, only I think he was more 



revengeful. He said that when he was grown up he would go and kill 

that baby she was going to have.'  
 

'You knew about the baby?'  

 

'Oh, of course I knew. And everyone knows what happened. She 

went crazy with rapture about having it and then when it was born it 

was an idiot! Serve her right. Idiot or no idiot, she didn't want us 

back again.'  

 

'You hate her very much.'  

 

'Why shouldn't I hate her? She did the worst thing to me that anyone 

can do to anyone else. Let them believe that they're loved and 

wanted and then show them that it's all a sham.'  
 

'What happened to your two - I'll call them brothers, for the sake of 

convenience.'  

 

'Oh, we all drifted apart later. Rod's farming somewhere in the 

Middle West. He's got a happy nature, and always had. Angus? I 

don't know. I lost sight of him.'  

 

'Did he continue to feel regretful?'  

 

'I shouldn't think so,' said Margot. 'It's not the sort of thing you can 

go on feeling. The last time I saw him, he said he was going on the 

stage. I don't know whether he did.'  

 

'You've remembered, though,' said Dermot.  



 

'Yes. I've remembered,' said Margot Bence.  
 

'Was MarinaGregg  surprised to see you on that day or did she 

make the arrangements for your photography on purpose to please 

you?'  

 

'She?' The girl smiled scornfully. 'She knew nothing about the 

arrangements. I was curious to see her, so I did a bit of lobbying to 

get the job. As I say I've got some influence with studio people. I 

wanted to see what she looked like nowadays.' She stroked the 

surface of the table. 'She didn't even recognize me. What do you 

think of that? I was with her for four years. From five years old to 

nine and she didn't recognize me.'  

 
'Children change,' said Dermot Craddock, 'they change so much 

that you'd hardly know them. I have a niece I met the other day and I 

assure you I'd have passed her in the street.'  

 

'Are you saying that to make me feel better? I don't care really. Oh, 

what the hell, let's be honest. I do care. I did. She had a magic, you 

know, MarinaGregg! A wonderful calamitous magic that took hold of you. 

You can hate a person and still mind.'  

 

'You didn't tell her who you were?'  

 

She shook her head. 'No, I didn't tell her. That's the last thing I'd do.'  

 

'Did you try and poison her, Miss Bence?'  

 



Her mood changed. She got up and laughed.  

 
'What ridiculous questions you do ask! But I suppose, you have to. 

It's part of your job. No. I can assure you I didn't kill her.'  

 

'That isn't what I asked you, Miss Bence.'  

 

She looked at him, frowning, puzzled.  

 

'MarinaGregg ,' he said, 'is still alive.'  

 

'For how long?'  

 

'What do you mean by that?'  

 
'Don't you think it's likely, Inspector, that someone will try again, 

and this time - this time, perhaps - they'll succeed?'  

 

'Precautions will be taken.'  

 

'Oh, I'm sure they will. The adoring husband will look after her, 

won't he, and make sure that no harm comes to her?'  

 

He was listening carefully to the mockery in her voice.  

 

'What did you mean when you said you didn't ask me that?' she 

said, harking back suddenly.  

 

'I asked you if you tried to kill her. You replied that you didn't kill 

her. That's true enough, but someone died, someone was killed.'  



 

'You mean I tried to kill MarinaGregg and instead I killed Mrs What's-her-
name. If you'd like me to make it quite clear, I didn't try to poison 

MarinaGregg and I didn't poison Mrs Badcock.'  

 

'But you know perhaps who did?'  

 

'I don't know anything, Inspector, I assure you.'  

 

'But you have some idea?'  

 

'Oh, one always has ideas.' She smiled at him, a mocking smile. 

'Among so many people it might be, mightn't it, the black-haired 

robot of a secretary, the elegant Hailey Preston, servants, maids, a 

masseur, the hairdresser, someone at the studios, so many people - 
and one of them mightn't be what he or she pretended to be.'  

 

Then as he took an unconscious step towards her she shook her 

head vehemently.  

 

'Relax, Inspector,' she said. 'I'm only teasing you. Somebody's out 

for MarinaGregg's blood, but who it is I've no idea. Really. I've no idea at 

all.' 

 

Chapter 16 

 



At No. 16 Aubrey Close, young Mrs Baker was talking to her 

husband. Jim Baker, a big good-looking blond giant of a man, was 
intent on assembling a model construction unit.  

 

'Neighbours!' said Cherry. She gave a toss of her black curly head. 

'Neighbours!' she said with venom.  

 

She carefully lifted the frying pan from the stove, then neatly shot 

its contents on to two plates, one rather fuller than the other. She 

placed the fuller one before her husband.  

 

'Mixed grill,' she announced.  

 

Jim looked up and sniffed appreciatively.  

 
'That's something like,' he said. 'What is today? My birthday?'  

 

'You have to be well nourished,' said Cherry.  

 

She was looking very pretty in a cerise and white striped apron with 

little frills on it. Jim Baker shifted the component parts of a strato-

cruiser to make room for his meal. He grinned at his wife and 

asked:  

 

'Who says so?'  

 

'My Miss Marple for one!' said Cherry. 'And if it comes to that,' she 

added, sitting down opposite Jim and pulling her plate towards her, 

'I should say she could do with a bit more solid nourishment herself. 

That old cat of a White Knight of hers, gives her nothing but 



carbohydrates. It's all she can think of! A "nice custard," a "nice 

bread and butter pudding," a "nice macaroni cheese." Squashy 
puddings with pink sauce. And gas, gas, gas, all day. Talks her 

head off she does.'  

 

'Oh well,' said Jim vaguely, 'it's invalid diet, I suppose.'  

 

'Invalid diet!' said Cherry and snorted. 'Miss Marple isn't an invalid - 

she's just old. Always interfering, too.'  

 

'Who, Miss Marple?'  

 

'No. That Miss Knight. Telling me how to do things! She even tries to 

tell me how to cook! I know a lot more about cooking than she 

does.'  
 

'You're top for cooking, Cherry,' said Jim appreciatively.  

 

'There's something to cooking,' said Cherry, 'something you can get 

your teeth into.'  

 

Jim laughed. 'I'm getting my teeth into this all right. Why did your 

Miss Marple say that I needed nourishing? Did she think I looked 

run-down, the other day when I came in to fit the bathroom shelf?'  

 

Cherry laughed. 'I'll tell you what she said to me. She said, "You've 

got a handsome husband, my dear. A very handsome husband." 

Sounds like one of those period books they read aloud on the telly.'  

 

'I hope you agreed with her?' said Jim with a grin.  



 

'I said you were all right.'  
 

'All right indeed! That's a nice lukewarm way of talking.'  

 

'And then she said "You must take care of your husband, my dear. 

Be sure you feed him properly. Men need plenty of good meat 

meals, well cooked."'  

 

'Hear, hear!'  

 

'And she told me to be sure and prepare fresh food for you and not 

to buy ready-made pies and things and slip them in the oven to 

warm up. Not that I do that often,' added Cherry virtuously.  

 
'You can't do it too seldom for me,' said Jim. 'They don't taste a bit 

the same.'  

 

'So long as you notice what you eat,' said Cherry, 'and aren't so 

taken up with those strato-cruisers and things you're always 

building. And don't tell me you bought that set as a Christmas 

present for your nephew Michael. You bought it so that you could 

play will it yourself.'  

 

'He's not quite old enough for it yet,' said Jim apologetically.  

 

'And I suppose you're going on dithering about with it all the 

evening. What about some music? Did you get that new record you 

were talking about?'  

 



'Yes, I did. Tchaikovsky 1812.'  

 
'That's the loud one with the battle, isn't it?' said Cherry. She made 

a face. 'Our Mrs Hartwell won't half like that! Neighbours! I'm fed up 

with neighbours. Always grousing and complaining. I don't know 

which is the worst. The Hartwells or the Barnabys. The Hartwells 

start rapping on the wall as early as twenty to eleven sometimes. 

It's a bit thick! After all even the telly and the B.B.C. go on later than 

that. Why shouldn't we have a bit of music if we like? And always 

asking us to turn it down low.'  

 

'You can't turn these things down low,' said Jim with authority. 'You 

don't get the tone unless you've got the volume. Everyone knows 

that. It's absolutely recognized in musical circles. And what about 

their cat - always coming over into our garden, digging up the beds, 
just when I've got it nice.'  

 

'I tell you what, Jim. I'm fed up with this place.'  

 

'You didn't mind your neighbours up in Huddersfield,' remarked 

Jim.  

 

'It wasn't the same there,' said Cherry. 'I mean, you're all 

independent there. If you're in trouble, somebody'd give you a hand 

and you'd give a hand to them. But you don't interfere. There's 

something about a new estate like this that makes people look 

sideways at their neighbours. Because we're all new I suppose. The 

amount of back-biting and tale-telling and writing to the council and 

one thing and another round here beats me! People in real towns 

are too busy for it.'  



 

'You may have something there, my girl.'  
 

'D'you like it here, Jim?'  

 

'The job's all right. And after all, this is a brand new house. I wish 

there was a bit more room in it so that I could spread myself a bit 

more. It would be fine if I could have a workshop.'  

 

'I thought it was lovely at first,' said Cherry, 'but now I'm not so 

sure. The house is all right and I love the blue paint and the 

bathroom's nice, but I don't like the people and the feeling round 

here. Did I tell you that Lily Price and that Harry of hers have broken 

off? It was a funny business that day in that house they went to look 

over. You know when she more or less fell out of the window. She 
said Harry just stood there like a stuck pig.'  

 

'I'm glad she's broken off with him. He's a no-good if I ever saw one,' 

said Jim.  

 

'No good marrying a chap just because a baby's on the way,' said 

Cherry. 'He didn't want to marry her, you know. He's not a very nice 

fellow. Miss Marple said he wasn't,' she added thoughtfully. 'She 

spoke to Lily about him. Lily thought she was crackers.'  

 

'Miss Marple? I didn't know she'd ever seen him?'  

 

'Oh yes, she was round here walking the day she fell down and Mrs 

Badcock picked her up and took her into her house. Do you think 

Arthur and Mrs Bain will make a match of it?'  



 

Jim frowned as he picked up a bit of strato-cruiser and consulted 
the instructional diagram.  

 

'I do wish you'd listen when I'm talking,' said Cherry.  

 

'What did you say?'  

 

'Arthur Badcock and Mary Bain.'  

 

'For the Lord's sake, Cherry, his wife's only just dead! You women! 

I've heard he's in a terrible state of nerves still - jumps if you speak 

to him.'  

 

'I wonder why... I shouldn't have thought he'd take it that way, 
would you?'  

 

'Can you clear off this end of the table a bit?' said Jim, relinquishing 

even a passing interest in the affairs of his neighbours. 'Just so that 

I can spread some of these pieces out a bit.'  

 

Cherry heaved an exasperated sigh.  

 

'To get any attention round here, you have to be a super jet, or a 

turbo prop,' she said bitterly. 'You and your construction models!'  

 

She piled the tray with the remains of supper and carried it over to 

the sink. She decided not to wash up, a necessity of dally life she 

always put off as long as possible. Instead, she piled everything 



into the sink, haphazard, slipped on a corduroy jacket and went out 

of the house, pausing to call over her shoulder:  
 

'I'm just going to slip along to see Gladys Dixon. I want to borrow 

one of her Vogue patterns.'  

 

'All right, old girl.' Jim bent over his model.  

 

Casting a venomous look at her next-door neighbour's front door as 

she passed, Cherry went round the corner into Blenheim Close and 

stopped at No. 16. The door was open and Cherry tapped on it and 

went into the hall calling out:  

 

'Is Gladdy about?'  

 
'Is that you, Cherry?' Mrs Dixon looked out of the kitchen. 'She's 

upstairs in her room, dressmaking.'  

 

'Right. I'll go up.'  

 

Cherry went upstairs to a small bedroom in which Gladys, a plump 

girl with a plain face, was kneeling on the floor, her cheeks flushed, 

and several pins in her mouth, tacking up a paper pattern.  

 

'Hallo, Cherry. Look, I got a lovely bit of stuff at Harper's sale at 

Much Benham. I'm going to do that cross-over pattern with frills 

again, the one I did in Terylene before.'  

 

'That'll be nice,' said Cherry.  

 



Gladys rose to her feet, panting a little.  

 
'Got indigestion now,' she said.  

 

'You oughtn't to do dressmaking right after supper,' said Cherry, 

'bending over like that.'  

 

'I suppose I ought to slim a bit,' said Gladys. She sat down on the 

bed.  

 

'Any news from the studios?' asked Cherry, always avid for film 

news.  

 

'Nothing much. There's a lot of talk still. MarinaGregg  came back 

on the set yesterday - and she created something frightful.'  
 

'What about?'  

 

'She didn't like the taste of her coffee. You know, they have coffee 

in the middle of the morning. She took one sip and said there was 

something wrong with it. Which was nonsense, of course. There 

couldn't have been. It comes in a jug straight from the canteen. Of 

course I always put hers in a special china cup, rather posh - 

different from the others - but it's the same coffee. So there couldn't 

have been anything wrong with it, could there?'  

 

'Nerves, I suppose,' said Cherry. 'What happened?'  

 

'Oh, nothing. JasonRuddRudd just calmed everyone down. He's wonderful 

that way. He took the coffee from her and poured it down the sink.'  



 

'That seems to be rather stupid,' said Cherry slowly.  
 

'Why - what do you mean?'  

 

'Well, if there was anything wrong with it - now nobody will ever 

know.'  

 

'Do you think there really might have been?' asked Gladys looking 

alarmed.  

 

'Well -' Cherry shrugged her shoulders, '- there was something 

wrong with her cocktail the day of the fкte, wasn't there, so why not 

the coffee? If at first you don't succeed, try, try, try again.'  

 
Gladys shivered.  

 

'I don't half like it, Cherry,' she said. 'Somebody's got it in for her all 

right. She's had more letters, you know, threatening her - and there 

was that bust business the other day.'  

 

'What bust business?'  

 

'A marble bust. On the set. It's a corner of a room in some Austrian 

palace or other. Funny name like Shotbrown. Pictures and china 

and marble busts. This one was up on a bracket - suppose it hadn't 

been pushed back enough. Anyway, a heavy lorry went past out in 

the road and jarred it off - right on to the chair where MarinaGregg sits for 

her big scene with Count Somebody-or-other. Smashed to 

smithereens! Lucky they weren't shooting at the time. JasonRuddRudd, he 



said not to say a word to her, and he put another chair there, and 

when she came yesterday and asked why the chair had been 
changed, he said the other chair was the wrong period, and this 

gave a better angle for the camera. But he didn't half like it - I can 

tell you that.'  

 

The two girls looked at each other.  

 

'It's exciting in a way,' said Cherry slowly. 'And yet - it isn't...'  

 

'I think I'm going to give up working in the canteen at the studios,' 

said Gladys.  

 

'Why? Nobody wants to poison you or drop marble busts on your 

head!'  
 

'No. But it's not always the person who's meant to get done in who 

gets done in. It may be someone else. Like Heather Badcock that 

day.'  

 

'True enough,' said Cherry.  

 

'You know,' said Gladys, 'I've been thinking. I was at the Hall that 

day, helping. I was quite close to them at the time.'  

 

'When Heather died?'  

 

'No, when she spilt the cocktail. All down her dress. A lovely dress 

it was, too, royal blue nylon taffeta. She'd got it quite new for the 

occasion. And it was funny.'  



 

'What was funny?'  
 

'I didn't think anything of it at the time. But it does seem funny when 

I think it over.'  

 

Cherry looked at her expectantly. She accepted the adjective 

'funny' in the sense that it was meant. It was not intended 

humorously.  

 

'For goodness' sake, what was funny?' she demanded.  

 

'I'm almost sure she did it on purpose.'  

 

'Spilt the cocktail on purpose?'  
 

'Yes. And I do think that was funny, don't you?'  

 

'On a brand new dress? I don't believe it.'  

 

'I wonder now,' said Gladys, 'what Arthur Badcock will do with all 

Heather's clothes. That dress would clean all right. Or I could take 

out half a breadth, it's a lovely full skirt. Do you think Arthur 

Badcock would think it very awful of me if I wanted to buy it off him? 

It would need hardly any alteration - and it's lovely stuff.'  

 

'You wouldn't' - Cherry hesitated - 'mind?'  

 

'Mind what?'  

 



'Well - having a dress that a woman had died in - I mean died that 

way...'  
 

Gladys stared at her.  

 

'I hadn't thought of that,' she admitted. She considered for a 

moment or two. Then she cheered up.  

 

'I can't see that it really matters,' she said. 'After all, every time you 

buy something second-hand, somebody's usually worn it who has 

died, haven't they?'  

 

'Yes. But it's not quite the same.'  

 

'I think you're being fanciful,' said Gladys. 'It's a lovely bright shade 
of blue, and really expensive stuff. About that funny business,' she 

continued thoughtfully, 'I think I'll go up to the hall tomorrow 

morning on my way to work and have a word with Mr Giuseppe 

about it.'  

 

'Is he the Italian butler?'  

 

'Yes. He's awfully handsome. Flashing eyes. He's got a terrible 

temper. When we go and help there, he chivvies us girls something 

terrible.' She giggled. 'But none of us really mind. He can be awfully 

nice sometimes... Anyway, I might just tell him about it, and ask him 

what I ought to do.'  

 

'I don't see that you've got anything to tell,' said Cherry.  

 



'Well, it was funny,' said Gladys, defiantly clinging to her favourite 

adjective.  
 

'I think,' said Cherry, 'that you just want an excuse to go and talk to 

Mr Giuseppe - and you'd better be careful, my girl. You know what 

these wops are like! Affiliation orders all over the place. Hot-

blooded and passionate, that's what these Italians are.'  

 

Gladys sighed ecstatically.  

 

Cherry looked at her friend's fat slightly spotted face and decided 

that her warnings were unnecessary. Mr Giuseppe, she thought, 

would have better fish to fry elsewhere. 

 

II 

 

'Aha!' said Dr Haydock, 'unravelling, I see.'  

 

He looked from Miss Marple to a pile of fluffy white fleecy wool.  

 

'You advised me to try unravelling if I couldn't knit,' said Miss 

Marple.  

 

'You seem to have been very thorough about it.'  

 

'I made a mistake in the pattern right at the beginning. That made 

the whole thing go out of proportion, so I've had to unravel it all. It's 

a very elaborate pattern, you see.'  



 

'What are elaborate patterns to you? Nothing at all.'  
 

'I ought really, I suppose, with my bad eyesight, to stick to plain 

knitting.'  

 

'You'd find that very boring. Well, I'm flattered that you took my 

advice.'  

 

'Don't I always take your advice, Doctor Haydock?'  

 

'You do when it suits you,' said Dr Haydock.  

 

'Tell me, Doctor, was it really knitting you had in mind when you 

gave me that advice?'  
 

He met the twinkle in her eyes and twinkled back at her.  

 

'How are you getting on with unravelling the murder?' he asked.  

 

'I'm afraid my faculties aren't quite what they were,' said Miss 

Marple, shaking her head with a sigh.  

 

'Nonsense,' said Dr Haydock. 'Don't tell me you haven't formed 

some conclusions.'  

 

'Of course I have formed conclusions. Very definite ones.'  

 

'Such as?' asked Haydock inquiringly.  

 



'If the cocktail glass was tampered with that day - and I don't see 

quite how that could have been done -'  
 

'Might have had the stuff ready in an eyedropper,' suggested 

Haydock.  

 

'You are so professional,' said Miss Marple admiringly. 'But even 

then it seems to me so very peculiar that nobody saw it happen.'  

 

'Murder should not only be done, but be seen done! Is that it?'  

 

'You know exactly what I mean,' said Miss Marple.  

 

'That was a chance the murderer had to take,' said Haydock.  

 
'Oh quite so. I'm not disputing that for a moment. But there were, I 

have found by inquiry and adding up the persons, at least eighteen 

to twenty people on the spot. It seems to me that amongst twenty 

people somebody must have seen that action occur.'  

 

Haydock nodded. 'One would think so, certainly. But obviously no 

one did.'  

 

'I wonder,' said Miss Marple thoughtfully.  

 

'What have you got in mind exactly?'  

 

'Well, there are three possibilities. I'm assuming that at least one 

person would have seen something. One out of twenty. I think it's 

only reasonable to assume that.'  



 

'I think you're begging the question,' said Haydock, 'and I can see 
looming ahead one of those terrible exercises in probability where 

six men have white hats and six men have black and you have to 

work it out by mathematics how likely it is that the hats will get 

mixed up and in what proportion. If you start thinking about things 

like that you would go round the bend. Let me assure you of that!'  

 

'I wasn't thinking of anything like that,' said Miss Marple. 'I was just 

thinking of what is likely -'  

 

'Yes,' said Haydock thoughtfully, 'you're very good at that. You 

always have been.'  

 

'It is likely, you know,' said Miss Marple, 'that out of twenty people 
one at least should be an observant one.'  

 

'I give in,' said Haydock. 'Let's have the three possibilities.'  

 

'I'm afraid I'll have to put them in rather sketchily,' said Miss Marple. 

'I haven't quite thought it out. Inspector Craddock, and probably 

Frank Cornish before him, will have questioned everybody who was 

there so the natural thing would be that whoever saw anything of 

the kind would have said so at once.'  

 

'Is that one of the possibilities?'  

 

'No, of course it isn't,' said Miss Marple, 'because it hasn't 

happened. What you have to account for is if one person did see 

something why didn't that person say so?'  



 

'I'm listening.'  
 

'Possibility One,' said Miss Marple, her cheeks going pink with 

animation. 'The person who saw it didn't realise what they had 

seen. That would mean, of course, that it would have to be rather a 

stupid person. Someone, let us say, who can use their eyes but not 

their brain. The sort of person who, if you asked them. 'Did you see 

anyone put anything in MarinaGregg 's glass?" would answer, "Oh, 

no," but if you said "Did you see anyone put their hand over the top 

of MarinaGregg 's glass" would say "Oh, yes, of course I did."'  

 

Haydock laughed. 'I admit,' he said, 'that one never quite allows for 

the moron in our midst. All right, I grant you Possibility One. The 

moron saw it, the moron didn't grasp what the action meant. And 
the second possibility?'  

 

'This one's far-fetched, but I do think it's just a possibility. It might 

have been a person whose action in putting something in a glass 

was natural.'  

 

'Wait, wait, explain that a little more clearly.'  

 

'It seems to me nowadays,' said Miss Marple, 'that people are 

always adding things to what they eat and drink. In my young days 

it was considered to be very bad manners to take medicines with 

one's meals. It was on a par with blowing your nose at the dinner 

table. It just wasn't done. If you had to take pills or capsules, or a 

spoonful of something, you went out of the room to do so. That's not 

the case now. When staying with my nephew Raymond, I observed 



some of his guests seemed to arrive with quite a quantity of little 

bottles of pills and tablets. They take them with food, or before 
food, or after food. They keep aspirins and such things in their 

handbags and take them the whole time - with cups of tea or with 

their after-dinner coffee. You understand what I mean?'  

 

'Oh, yes,' said Dr Haydock, 'I've got your meaning now and it's 

interesting. You mean that someone -' he stopped. 'Let's have it in 

your own words.'  

 

'I meant,' said Miss Marple, 'that it would be quite possible, 

audacious but possible, for someone to pick up that glass which as 

soon as it was in his or her hand, of course, would be assumed to 

be his or her own drink and to add whatever was added quite 

openly. In that case, you see, people wouldn't think twice of it.'  
 

'He - or she - couldn't be sure of that, though,' Haydock pointed out.  

 

'No,' agreed Miss Marple, 'it would be a gamble, a risk - but it could 

happen. And then,' she went on, 'there's the third possibility.'  

 

'Possibility One, a moron,' said the doctor. 'Possibility Two, a 

gambler - what's Possibility Three?'  

 

'Somebody saw what happened, and has held their tongue 

deliberately.'  

 

Haydock frowned. 'For what reason?' he asked. 'Are you 

suggesting blackmail? If so -'  

 



'If so,' said Miss Marple, 'it's a very dangerous thing to do.'  

 
'Yes, indeed.' He looked sharply at the placid old lady with the white 

fleecy garment on her lap. 'Is the third possibility the one you 

consider the most probable one?'  

 

'No,' said Miss Marple, 'I wouldn't go so far as that. I have, at the 

moment, insufficient grounds. Unless,' she added carefully, 

'someone else gets killed.'  

 

'Do you think someone else is going to get killed?'  

 

'I hope not,' said Miss Marple, 'I trust and pray not. But it so often 

happens, Doctor Haydock. That's the sad and frightening thing. It 

so often happens.' 

 

Chapter 17 

 

Ella put down the telephone receiver, smiled m herself and came 

out of the public telephone box. She was pleased with herself.  

 

'Chief-Inspector God Almighty Craddock!' she said to herself. 'I'm 

twice as good as he is at the job. Variations on the theme off "Fly, 

all is discovered!"'  

 

She pictured to herself with a good deal of pleasure the reactions 

recently suffered by the person at the other end of the line. That 

faint menacing whisper coming through the receiver. 'I saw you...'  



 

She laughed silently, the corners of her mouth curving up in a feline 
cruel line. A student of psychology might have watched her with 

some interest. Never until the last few days had she had this feeling 

of power. She was hardly aware herself of how much the heady 

intoxication of it affected her...  

 

She passed the East Lodge and Mrs Bantry, busy as usual in the 

garden, waved a hand to her.  

 

'Damn that old woman,' thought Ella. She could feel Mrs Bantry's 

eyes following her as she walked up the drive.  

 

A phrase came into her head for no particular reason. The pitcher 

goes to the well once too often...  
 

Nonsense. Nobody could suspect that it was she who had 

whispered those menacing words...  

 

She sneezed.  

 

'Damn this hay-fever,' said Ella Zielinsky.  

 

When she came into her office, JasonRudd  was standing by the 

window.  

 

He wheeled round.  

 

'I couldn't think where you were.'  

 



'I had to go and speak to the gardener. There were -' she broke off 

as she caught sight of his face.  
 

She asked sharply: 'What is it?'  

 

His eyes seemed set deeper in his face than ever. All the gaiety of 

the clown was gone. This was a man under strain. She had seen 

him under strain before but never looking like this.  

 

She said again: 'What is it?'  

 

He held a sheet of paper out to her. 'It's the analysis of that coffee. 

The coffee that MarinaGregg complained about and wouldn't drink.'  

 

'You sent it to be analysed?' She was startled. 'But you poured it 
away down the sink. I saw you.'  

 

His wide mouth curled up in a smile. 'I'm pretty good at sleight of 

hand, Ella,' he said. 'You didn't know that, did you? Yes, I poured 

most of it away but I kept a little and I took it along to be analysed.'  

 

She looked down at the paper in her hand.  

 

'Arsenic.' She sounded incredulous.  

 

'Yes, arsenic.'  

 

'So MarinaGregg was right about it tasting bitter?'  

 



'She wasn't right about that. Arsenic has no taste. But her instinct 

was quite right.'  
 

'And we thought she was just being hysterical!'  

 

'She is hysterical! Who wouldn't be? She has a woman drop dead at 

her feet practically. She gets threatening notes - one after another - 

there's not been anything today, has there?'  

 

Ella shook her head.  

 

'Who plants the damned things? Oh well, I suppose it's easy enough 

- all these open windows. Anyone could slip in.'  

 

'You mean we ought to keep the house barred and locked? But it's 
such hot weather. There's a man posted in the grounds, after all.'  

 

'Yes, and I don't want to frighten her more than she's frightened 

already. Threatening notes don't matter two hoots. But arsenic, 

Ella, arsenic's different...'  

 

'Nobody could tamper with food here in the house.'  

 

'Couldn't they, Ella? Couldn't they?'  

 

'Not without being seen. No unauthorized person -'  

 

He interrupted.  

 

'People will do things for money, Ella.'  



 

'Hardly murder!'  
 

'Even that. And they mightn't realize it was murder... The 

servants...'  

 

'I'm sure the servants are all right.'  

 

'Giuseppe now. I doubt if I'd trust Giuseppe very far if it came to the 

question of money... He's been with us some time, of course, but -'  

 

'Must you torture yourself like this, JasonRudd?'  

 

He flung himself down in the chair. He leaned forward, his long 

arms hanging down between his knees.  
 

'What to do?' he said slowly and softly. 'My God, what to do?'  

 

Ella did not speak. She sat there watching him.  

 

'She was happy here,' said JasonRudd. He was speaking more to himself 

than to Ella. He stared down between his knees at the carpet. If he 

had looked up, the expression on her face might perhaps have 

surprised him.  

 

'She was happy,' he said again. 'She hoped to be happy and she 

was happy. She was saying so that day, the day Mrs What's-her-

name-'  

 

'Bantry?'  



 

'Yes. The day Mrs Bantry came to tea. She said it was "so 
peaceful." She said that at last she'd found a place where she could 

settle down and be happy and feel secure. My goodness, secure!'  

 

'Happy ever after?' Ella's voice held a slight tone of irony. Yes, put 

like that, it sounds just like a fairy story.'  

 

'At any rate she believed it.'  

 

'But you didn't,' said Ella. 'You never thought it would be like that?'  

 

JasonRudd  smiled. 'No. I didn't go the whole hog. But I did think 

that for a while, a year - two years - there might be a period of calm 

and content. It might have made a new woman of her. It might have 
given her confidence in herself. She can be happy, you know. When 

she is happy she's like a child. Just like a child. And now - this had 

to happen to her.'  

 

Ella moved restlessly. 'Things have to happen to all of us,' she said 

brusquely. 'That's the way life is. You just have to take it. Some of us 

can, some of us can't. She's the kind that can't.'  

 

She sneezed.  

 

'Your hay-fever bad again?'  

 

'Yes. By the way, Giuseppe's gone to London.'  

 

JasonRudd looked faintly surprised.  



 

'To London? Why?'  
 

'Some kind of family trouble. He's got relations in Soho, and one of 

them's desperately ill. He went to MarinaGregg about it and she said it 

was all right, so I gave him the day off. He'll be back sometime 

tonight. You don't mind do you?'  

 

'No,' said JasonRudd, 'I don't mind...'  

 

He got up and walked up and down.  

 

'If I could take her away... now... at once.'  

 

'Scrap the picture? But just think.'  
 

His voice rose.  

 

'I can't think of anything but MarinaGregg. Don't you understand? She's in 

danger. That's all I can think about.'  

 

She opened her mouth impulsively, then closed it.  

 

She gave another muffled sneeze and rose.  

 

'I'd better get my atomizer.'  

 

She left the room and went to her bedroom, a word echoing in her 

mind.  

 



MarinaGregg... MarinaGregg... MarinaGregg... Always MarinaGregg...  

 
Fury rose up in her. She stilled it. She went into the bathroom and 

picked up the spray she used.  

 

She inserted the nozzle into one nostril and squeezed.  

 

The warning came a second too late... Her brain recognized the 

unfamiliar odour of bitter almonds... but not in time to paralyse the 

squeezing fingers... 

 

Chapter 18 

 

Frank Cornish replaced the receiver.  

 
'Miss Brewster is out of London for the day,' he announced.  

 

'Is she now?' said Craddock.  

 

'Do you think she -'  

 

'I don't know. I shouldn't think so, but I don't know. Ardwyck Fenn?'  

 

'Out. I left word for him to ring you. And Margot Bence, Personality 

Photographer, has got an assignment somewhere in the country. 

Her pansy partner didn't know where - or said he didn't. And the 

butler's hooked it to London.'  

 



'I wonder,' said Craddock thoughtfully, 'if the butler has hooked it 

for good. I always suspect dying relatives. Why was he suddenly 
anxious to go to London today?'  

 

'He could have put the cyanide in the atomizer easily enough before 

he left.'  

 

'Anybody could.'  

 

'But I think he's indicated. It could hardly be someone from outside.'  

 

'Oh, yes, it could. You'd have to judge your moment. You could 

leave a car in one of the side drives, wait until everyone is in the 

dining-room, say, and slip in through a window and upstairs. The 

shrubberies come close up to the house.'  
 

'Damn' risky.'  

 

'This murderer doesn't mind taking risks, you know. That's been 

apparent all along.'  

 

'We've had a man on duty in the grounds.'  

 

'I know. One man wasn't enough. So long as it was a question of 

these anonymous letters I didn't feel so much urgency. MarinaGregg 

 herself is being well guarded. It never occurred to me that 

anyone else was in danger. I -'  

 

The telephone rang. Cornish took the call.  

 



'It's the Dorchester. Mr Ardwyck Fenn is on the line.' He proffered 

the receiver to Craddock who took it.  
 

'Mr Fenn? This is Craddock here.'  

 

'Ah, yes. I heard you had rung me. I have been out all day.'  

 

'I am sorry to tell you, Mr Fern, that Miss Zielinsky died this morning 

- of cyanide poisoning.'  

 

'Indeed? I am shocked to hear it. An accident? Or not an accident?'  

 

'Not an accident. Prussic acid had been put in an atomizer she was 

in the habit of using.'  

 
'I see. Yes, I see...' There was a short pause. 'And why, may I ask, 

should you ring me about this distressing occurrence?'  

 

'You knew Miss Zielinsky, Mr Fenn?'  

 

'Certainly I knew her. I have known her for some years. But she was 

not an intimate friend.'  

 

'We hoped that you could, perhaps, assist us?'  

 

'In what way?'  

 

'We wondered if you could suggest any motive for her death. She is 

a stranger in this country. We know very little about her friends and 

associates and the circumstances of her life.'  



 

'I would suggest that JasonRudd  is the person to question about 
that.'  

 

'Naturally. We have done so. But there might be an off-chance that 

you might know something about her that he does not.'  

 

'I'm afraid that is not so. I know next to nothing about Ella Zielinsky 

except that she was a most capable young woman, and first-class 

at her job. About her private life I know nothing at all.'  

 

'So you have no suggestions to make?'  

 

Craddock was ready for the decisive negative, but to his surprise it 

did not come. Instead there was a pause. He could hear Ardwyck 
Fern breathing rather heavily at the other end.  

 

'Are you still there, Chief-Inspector?'  

 

'Yes, Mr Fenn. I'm here.'  

 

'I have decided to tell you something that may be of assistance to 

you. When you hear what it is, you will realize that I have every 

reason to keep it to myself. But I judge that in the end that might be 

unwise. The facts are these. A couple of days ago I received a 

telephone call. A voice spoke to me in a whisper. It said - I am 

quoting now - I saw you... I saw you put the tablets in the glass... 

You didn't know there had been an eye-witness, did you? That's all 

for now - very soon you will be told what you have to do.'  

 



Craddock uttered an ejaculation of astonishment.  

 
'Surprising, was it not, Mr Craddock? I will assure you categorically 

that the accusation was entirely unfounded. I did not put tablets in 

anybody's glass. I defy anyone to prove that I did. The suggestion is 

utterly absurd. But it would seem, would it not, that Miss Zielinsky 

was embarking on blackmail.'  

 

'You recognized her voice?'  

 

'You cannot recognize a whisper. But it was Ella Zielinsky all right.'  

 

'How do you know?'  

 

'The whisperer sneezed heavily before ringing off. I knew that Miss 
Zielinsky suffered from hay fever.'  

 

'And you think - what?'  

 

'I think that Miss Zielinsky got hold of the wrong person at her first 

attempt. It seems to me possible that she was more successful 

later. Blackmail can be a dangerous game.'  

 

Craddock pulled himself together.  

 

'I must thank you for your statement, Mr Fenn. As a matter of form, I 

shall have to check upon your movements today.'  

 

'Naturally. My chauffeur will be able to give you precise 

information.'  



 

Craddock rang off and repeated what Fenn had said. Cornish 
whistled.  

 

'Either that lets him out completely. Or else -'  

 

'Or else it's a magnificent piece of bluff. It could be. He's the kind of 

man who has the nerve for it. If there's the least chance that Ella 

Zielinsky left a record of her suspicions, then this taking of the bull 

by the horns is a magnificent bluff.'  

 

'And his alibi?'  

 

'We've come across some very good faked alibis in our time,' said 

Craddock. 'He could afford to pay a good sum for one.' 

 

II 

 

It was past midnight when Giuseppe returned to Gossington. He 

took a taxi from Much Benham, as the last train on the branch line 

to St Mary Mead had gone.  

 

He was in very good spirits. He paid off the taxi at the gate, and 

took a short cut through the shrubbery. He opened the back door 

with his key. The house was dark and silent. Giuseppe shut and 

bolted the door. As he turned to the stair which led to his own 

comfortable suite of bed and bath, he noticed that there was a 

draught. A window open somewhere, perhaps. He decided not to 



bother. He went upstairs smiling and fitted a key into his door. He 

always kept his suite locked. As he turned the key and pushed the 
door open, he felt the pressure of a hard round thing in his back. A 

voice said, 'Put your hands up and don't scream.'  

 

Giuseppe threw his hands up quickly. He was taking no chances. 

Actually there was no chance to take.  

 

The trigger was pressed - once - twice.  

 

Giuseppe fell forward...  

 

Bianca lifted her head from her pillow.  

 

Was that a shot... She was almost sure she had heard a shot... She 
waited some minutes. Then she decided she had been mistaken 

and lay down again. 

 

Chapter 19 

 

'It's too dreadful,' said Miss Knight. She put down her parcels and 

gasped for breath.  

 

'Something has happened?' asked Miss Marple.  

 

'I really don't like to tell you about it, dear, I really don't. It might be 

a shock to you.'  

 



'If you don't tell me,' said Miss Marple, 'somebody else will.'  

 
'Dear, dear, that's true enough,' said Miss Knight. 'Yes, that's 

terribly true. Everybody talks too much, they say. And I'm sure 

there's a lot in that. I never repeat anything myself. Very careful I 

am.'  

 

'You were saying,' said Miss Marple, 'that something rather terrible 

had happened?'  

 

'It really quite bowled me over,' said Miss Knight. 'Are you sure you 

don't feel the draught from that window, dear?'  

 

'I like a little fresh air,' said Miss Marple.  

 
'Ah, but we mustn't catch cold, must we?' said Miss Knight archly. 

'I'll tell you what. I'll just pop out and make you a nice egg-nog. We'd 

like that, wouldn't we?'  

 

'I don't know whether you would like it,' said Miss Marple. 'I should 

be delighted for you to have it if you would like it.'  

 

'Now, now,' said Miss Knight, shaking her finger, 'so fond of our 

joke, aren't we?'  

 

'But you were going to tell me something,' said Miss Marple.  

 

'Well, you mustn't worry about it,' said Miss Knight, 'and you mustn't 

let it make you nervous in any way, because I'm sure it's nothing to 



do with us. But with all these American gangsters and things like 

that, well I suppose it's nothing to be surprised about.'  
 

'Somebody else has been killed,' said Miss Marple, 'is that it?'  

 

'Oh, that's very sharp of you, dear. I don't know what should put 

such a thing into your head.'  

 

'As a matter of fact,' said Miss Marple thoughtfully, 'I've been 

expecting it.'  

 

'Oh, really? exclaimed Miss Knight.  

 

'Somebody always sees something,' said Miss Marple, 'only 

sometimes it takes a little while for them to realize what it is they 
have seen. Who is it who's dead?'  

 

'The Italian butler. He was shot last night.'  

 

'I see,' said Miss Marple thoughtfully. 'Yes, very likely, of course, but 

I should have thought that he'd have realized before now the 

importance of what he saw -'  

 

'Really!' exclaimed Miss Knight, 'you talk as though you knew all 

about it. Why should he have been killed?'  

 

'I expect,' said Miss Marple, thoughtfully, 'that he tried to blackmail 

somebody.'  

 

'He went to London yesterday, they say.'  



 

'Did he now,' said Miss Marple, 'that's very interesting, and 
suggestive too, I think.'  

 

Miss Knight departed to the kitchen intent on the concoction of 

nourishing beverages. Miss Marple remained sitting thoughtfully till 

disturbed by the loud aggressive humming of the vacuum cleaner, 

assisted by Cherry's voice singing the latest favourite ditty of the 

moment, 'I Said To You and You Said To Me.'  

 

Miss Knight popped her head round the kitchen door.  

 

'Not quite so much noise, please, Cherry,' she said. 'You don't want 

to disturb Miss Marple, do you? You mustn't be thoughtless, you 

know.'  
 

She shut the kitchen door again as Cherry remarked, either to 

herself or the world at large, 'And who said you could call me 

Cherry, you old jelly-bag?' The vacuum continued to whine while 

Cherry sang in a more subdued voice. Miss Marple called in a high 

clear voice:  

 

'Cherry, come here a minute.'  

 

Cherry switched off the vacuum and opened the drawing-room 

door.  

 

'I didn't mean to disturb you by singing, Miss Marple.'  

 



'Your singing is much pleasanter than the horrid noise that vacuum 

makes,' said Miss Marple, 'but I know one has to go with the times. 
It would be no use on earth asking any of you young people to use 

the dustpan and brush in the old-fashioned way.'  

 

'What, get down on my knees with a dustpan and brush?' Cherry 

registered alarm and surprise.  

 

'Quite unheard of, I know,' said Miss Marple. 'Come in and shut the 

door. I called you because I wanted to talk to you.'  

 

Cherry obeyed and came towards Miss Marple looking inquiringly 

at her.  

 

'We've not much time,' said Miss Marple. 'That old - Miss Knight I 
mean - will come in any moment with an egg drink of some kind.'  

 

'Good for you, I expect. It'll pep you up,' said Cherry encouragingly.  

 

'Had you heard,' asked Miss Marple, 'that the butler at Gossington 

Hall was shot last night?'  

 

'What, the wop?' demanded Cherry.  

 

'Yes. His name is Giuseppe, I understand.'  

 

'No,' said Cherry, 'I hadn't heard that. I heard that JasonRuddRudd's 

secretary had a heart attack yesterday, and somebody said she 

was actually dead - but I suspect that was just a rumour. Who told 

you about the butler?'  



 

'Miss Knight came back and told me.'  
 

'Of course I haven't seen anyone to speak to this morning,' said 

Cherry, 'not before coming along here. I expect the news has only 

just got round. Was he bumped off?' she demanded.  

 

'That seems to be assumed,' said Miss Marple, 'whether rightly or 

wrongly I don't quite know.'  

 

'This is a wonderful place for talk,' said Cherry. 'I wonder if Gladys 

got to see him or not,' she added thoughtfully.  

 

'Gladys?'  

 
'Oh, a sort of friend of mine. She lives a few doors away. Works in 

the canteen at the studios.'  

 

'And she talked to you about Giuseppe?'  

 

'Well, there was something that struck her as a bit funny and she 

was going to ask him what he thought about it. But if you ask me it 

was just an excuse - she's a bit sweet on him. Of course he's quite 

handsome and Italians do have a way with them - I told her to be 

careful about him, though. You know what Italians are.'  

 

'He went to London yesterday,' said Miss Marple, 'and only returned 

in the evening I understand.'  

 

'I wonder if she managed to get to see him before he went.'  



 

'Why did she want to see him, Cherry?'  
 

'It was just something which she felt was a bit funny,' said Cherry.  

 

Miss Marple looked at her inquiringly. She was able to take the 

word 'funny' at the valuation it usually had for the Gladyses of the 

neighbourhood.  

 

'She was one of the girls who helped at the party there,' explained 

Cherry. 'The day of the fкte. You know, when Mrs Badcock got 

hers.'  

 

'Yes?' Miss Marple was looking more alert than ever, much as a fox 

terrier might look at a waiting rat-hole.  
 

'And there was something that she saw that struck her as a bit 

funny.'  

 

'Why didn't she go to the police about it?'  

 

'Well, she didn't really think it meant anything, you see,' explained 

Cherry. 'Anyway she thought she'd better ask Mr Giuseppe first.'  

 

'What was it that she saw that day?'  

 

'Frankly,' said Cherry, 'what she told me seemed nonsense! I've 

wondered, perhaps, if she was just putting me off - and what she 

was going to see Mr Giuseppe about was something quite 

different."  



 

"What did she say?' Miss Marple was patient and pursuing.  
 

Cherry frowned. 'She was talking about Mrs Badcock and the 

cocktail and she said she was quite near her at the time. And she 

said she did it herself.'  

 

'Did what herself?'  

 

'Spilt her cocktail all down her dress, and ruined it.'  

 

'You mean it was clumsiness?'  

 

'No, not clumsiness. Gladys said she did it on purpose - that she 

meant to do it. Well, I mean, that doesn't make sense, does it, 
however you look at it?'  

 

Miss Marple shook her head, perplexed. 'No,' she said. 'Certainly 

not - no, I can't see any sense in that.'  

 

'She'd got on a new dress too,' said Cherry. 'That's how the subject 

came up. Gladys wondered whether she'd be able to buy it. Said it 

ought to clean all right but she didn't like to go and ask Mr Badcock 

herself. She's very good at dressmaking, Gladys is, and she said it 

was lovely stuff. Royal blue taffeta; and she said even if the stuff 

was ruined where the cocktail stained it, she could take out a seam 

- half a breadth say - because it was one of those full skirts.'  

 

Miss Marple considered this dressmaking problem for a moment 

and then set it aside.  



 

'But you think your friend Gladys might have been keeping 
something back?'  

 

'Well, I just wondered because I don't see if that's all she saw - 

Heather Badcock deliberately spilling her cocktail over herself - I 

don't see that there'd be anything to ask Mr Giuseppe about, do 

you?'  

 

'No, I don't,' said Miss Marple. She sighed. 'But it's always 

interesting when one doesn't see,' she added. 'If you don't see what 

a thing means you must be looking at it wrong way round, unless of 

course you haven't got full information. Which is probably the case 

here.' She sighed. 'It's a pity she didn't go straight to the police.'  

 
The door opened and Miss Knight bustled in holding a tall tumbler 

with a delicious pale yellow froth on top.  

 

'Now here you are, dear,' she said, 'a nice little treat. We're going to 

enjoy this.'  

 

She pulled forward a little table and placed it beside her employer. 

Then she turned a glance on Cherry. 'The vacuum cleaner,' she 

said coldly, 'is left in a most difficult position in the hall. I nearly fell 

over it. Anyone might have an accident.'  

 

'Right-ho,' said Cherry. 'I'd better get on with things.'  

 

She left the room.  

 



'Really,' said Miss Knight, 'that Mrs Baker! I'm continually having to 

speak to her about something or other. Leaving vacuum cleaners 
all over the place and coming in here chattering to you when you 

want to be quiet.'  

 

'I called her in,' said Miss Marple. 'I wanted to speak to her.'  

 

'Well, I hope you mentioned the way the beds are made,' said Miss 

Knight. 'I was quite shocked when I came to turn down your bed 

last night. I had to make it all over again.'  

 

'That was very kind of you,' said Miss Marple.  

 

'Oh, I never grudge being helpful,' said Miss Knight. 'That's why I'm 

here, isn't it. To make a certain person we know as comfortable and 
happy as possible. Oh dear, dear,' she added, 'you've pulled out a 

lot of your knitting again.'  

 

Miss Marple leaned back and closed her eyes. 'I'm going to have a 

little rest,' she said. 'Put the glass here - thank you. And please 

don't come in and disturb me for at least three-quarters of an hour.'  

 

'Indeed I won't, dear,' said Miss Knight. 'And I'll tell that Mrs Baker 

to be very quiet.'  

 

She bustled out purposefully. 

 

II 



 

The good-looking young American glanced round him in a puzzled 
way.  

 

The ramifications of the housing estate perplexed him.  

 

He addressed himself politely to an old lady with white hair and pink 

cheeks who seemed to be the only human being in sight.  

 

'Excuse me, m'am, but could you tell me where to find Blenheim 

Close?'  

 

The old lady considered him for a moment. He had just begun to 

wonder if she was deaf, and had prepared himself to repeat his 

demand in a louder voice, when she spoke.  
 

'Along here to the right, then turn left, second to the right again, 

and straight on. What number do you want?'  

 

'No. 16.' He consulted a small piece of paper. 'Gladys Dixon.'  

 

'That's right,' said the old lady. 'But I believe she works at the 

Hellingforth Studios. In the canteen. You'll find her there if you want 

her.'  

 

'She didn't turn up this morning,' explained the young man. 'I want 

to get hold of her to come up to Gossington Hall. We're very 

shorthanded there today.'  

 



'Of course,' said the old lady. 'The butler was shot last night, wasn't 

he?'  
 

The young man was slightly staggered by this reply.  

 

'I guess news gets round pretty quickly in these parts,' he said.  

 

'It does indeed,' said the old lady. 'JasonRuddRudd's secretary died of 

some kind of seizure yesterday, too, I understand.' She shook her 

head. 'Terrible. Quite terrible. What are we coming to?' 

 

Chapter 20 

 

A little later in the day yet another visitor found his way to 16 

Blenheim Close. Detective-Sergeant William (Tom) Tiddler.  
 

In reply to his sharp knock on the smart yellow painted door, it was 

opened to him by a girl of about fifteen. She had long straggly fair 

hair and was wearing tight black pants and an orange sweater.  

 

'Miss Gladys Dixon live here?'  

 

'You want Gladys? You're unlucky. She isn't here.'  

 

'Where is she? Out for the evening?'  

 

'No. She's gone away. Bit of a holiday like.'  

 



'Where's she gone to?'  

 
'That's telling,' said the girl.  

 

Tom Tiddler smiled at her in his most ingratiating manner. 'May I 

come in? Is your mother at home?'  

 

'Mum's out at work. She won't be in until half past seven. But she 

can't tell you any more than I can. Gladys has gone off for a 

holiday.'  

 

'Oh, I see. When did she go?'  

 

'This morning. All of a sudden like. Said she'd got the chance of a 

free trip.'  
 

'Perhaps you wouldn't mind giving me her address.'  

 

The fair-haired girl shook her head. 'Haven't got an address,' she 

said. 'Gladys said she'd send us her address as soon as she knew 

where she was going to stay. As like as not she won't though,' she 

added. 'Last summer she went to Torquay and never sent us as 

much as a postcard. She's slack that way and besides, she says, 

why do mothers have to bother all the time?'  

 

'Did somebody stand her this holiday?'  

 

'Must have,' said the girl. 'She's pretty hard up at the moment. Went 

to the sales last week.'  

 



'And you've no idea at all who gave her this trip or - er - paid for her 

going there?'  
 

The fair girl bristled suddenly.  

 

'Now don't get any wrong ideas. Our Gladys isn't that sort. She and 

her boyfriend may like to go to the same place for holidays in 

August, but there's nothing wrong about it. She pays for herself. So 

don't you get ideas, mister.'  

 

Tiddler said meekly that he wouldn't get ideas but he would like the 

address if Gladys Dixon should send a postcard.  

 

He returned to the station with the result of his various inquiries. 

From the studios, he had learnt that Gladys Dixon had rung up that 
day and said she wouldn't be able to come to work for about a 

week. He had also learned some other things.  

 

'No end of a shemozzle there's been there lately,' he said. 'MarinaGregg 

's been having hysterics most days. Said some coffee she 

was given was poisoned. Said it tasted bitter. Awful state of nerves 

she was in. Her husband took it and threw it down the sink and told 

her not to make so much fuss.'  

 

'Yes?' said Craddock. It seemed plain there was more to come.  

 

'But word went round as JasonRuddRudd didn't throw it all away. He kept 

some and had it analysed and it was poison.'  

 



'It sounds to me,' said Craddock, 'very unlikely. I'll have to ask him 

about that.' 

 

II 

 

JasonRudd  was nervous, irritable.  

 

'Surely, Inspector Craddock,' he said, 'I was only doing what I had a 

perfect right to do.'  

 

'If you suspected anything was wrong with that coffee, JasonRuddRudd, it 

would have been much better if you'd turned it over to us.'  

 

'The truth of it is that I didn't suspect for a moment that anything 

was wrong with it.'  
 

'In spite of your wife saying that it tasted odd?'  

 

'Oh, that!' A faintly rueful smile came to JasonRuddRudd's face. 'Ever since the 

date of the fкte everything that my wife has eaten or drunk has 

tasted odd. What with that and the threatening notes that have 

been coming '  

 

'There have been more of them?'  

 

'Two more. One through the window down there. The other one was 

slipped in the letter-box. Here they are if you would like to see 

them.'  



 

Craddock looked. They were printed, as the first one had been. One 
ran: 

 

"It won't be long now. Prepare yourself." 

 

The other had a rough drawing of a skull and crossbones and below 

it was written:  

 

"This means you, MarinaGregg."  

 

Craddock's eyebrows rose.  

 

'Very childish,' he said.  

 
'Meaning you discount them as dangerous?'  

 

'Not at all,' said Craddock. 'A murderer's mind usually is childish. 

You've really no idea at all, JasonRuddRudd, who sent these?'  

 

'Not the least,' said JasonRudd. 'I can't help feeling it's more like a 

macabre joke than anything else. It seemed to me perhaps -' he 

hesitated.  

 

'Yes, JasonRuddRudd?'  

 



'It could be somebody local, perhaps, who - who had been excited 

by the poisoning on the day of the fкte. Someone perhaps, who has 
a grudge against the acting profession. There are rural pockets 

where acting is considered to be one of the devil's weapons.'  

 

'Meaning that you think Miss MarinaGregg is not actually threatened? But 

what about this business of the coffee?'  

 

'I don't even know how you got to hear about that,' said JasonRuddRudd with 

some annoyance.  

 

Craddock shook his head.  

 

'Everyone's talked about that. It always comes to one's ears Sooner 

or later. But you should have come to us. Even when you got the 
result of the analysis you didn't let us know, did you?'  

 

'No,' said JasonRudd. 'No, I didn't. But I had other things to think about. 

Poor Ella's death for one thing. And now this business of Giuseppe. 

Inspector Craddock, when can I get my wife away from here? She's 

half frantic.'  

 

'I can understand that. But there will be the inquests to attend.'  

 

'You do realize that her life is still in danger?'  

 

'I hope not. Every precaution will be taken '  

 

'Every precaution! I've heard that before, I think... I must get her 

away from here, Craddock. I must.' 



 

III 

 

MarinaGregg was lying on the chaise-longue in her bedroom, her eyes 

closed. She looked grey with strain and fatigue.  

 

Her husband stood there for a moment looking at her. Her eyes 

opened.  

 

'Was that that Craddock man?'  

 

'Yes.'  

 

'What did he come about? Ella?'  

 
'Ella - and Giuseppe.'  

 

MarinaGregg frowned.  

 

'Giuseppe? Have they found out who shot him?'  

 

'Not yet.'  

 

'It's all a nightmare... Did he say we could go away?'  

 

'He said - not yet.'  

 



'Why not? We must. Didn't you make him see that I can't go on 

waiting day after day for someone to kill me. It's fantastic.'  
 

'Every precaution will be taken.'  

 

'They said that before. Did it stop Ella being killed? Or Giuseppe? 

Don't you see, they'll get me in the end... There was something in 

my coffee that day at the studio. I'm sure there was... if only you 

hadn't poured it away! If we'd kept it, we could have had it analysed 

or whatever you call it. We'd have known for sure...'  

 

'Would it have made you happier to know for sure?'  

 

She stared at him, the pupils of her eyes widely dilated.  

 
'I don't see what you mean. If they'd known for sure that someone 

was trying to poison me, they'd have to let us leave here, they'd 

have to let us get away.'  

 

'Not necessarily.'  

 

'But I can't go on like this! I can't... I can't... You must help me, 

JasonRudd. You must do something. I'm frightened. I'm so terribly 

frightened... There's an enemy here. And I don't know who it is... It 

might be anyone - anyone. At the studios or here in the house. 

Someone who hates me - but why?... Why?... Someone who wants 

me dead... But who is it? Who is it? I thought - I was almost sure - it 

was Ella. But now -'  

 

'You thought it was Ella?' JasonRudd sounded astonished. 'But why?  



 

'Because she hated me - oh yes she did. Don't men ever see these 
things? She was madly in love with you. I don't believe you had the 

least idea of it. But it can't be Ella, because Ella's dead. Oh, Jinks, 

Jinks - do help me - get me away from here - let me go somewhere 

safe... safe...'  

 

She sprang up and walked rapidly up and down, turning and 

twisting her hands.  

 

The director in JasonRudd was full of admiration for those passionate, 

tortured movements. I must remember them, he thought. For Hedda 

Gabler, perhaps? Then, with a shock, he remembered that it was 

his wife he was watching.  

 
'It's all right, MarinaGregg - all right. I'll look after you.'  

 

'We must go away from this hateful house - at once. I hate his house 

- hate it.'  

 

'Listen, we can't go away immediately.'  

 

'Why not? Why not?'  

 

'Because,' said JasonRuddRudd, 'deaths cause complications... and there's 

something else to consider. Will running away do any good?'  

 

'Of course it will. We'll get away from this person who hates me.'  

 



'If there's anyone who hates you that much, they could follow you 

easily enough.'  
 

'You mean - you mean - I shall never get away? I shall never be safe 

again?'  

 

'Darling - it will be all right. I'll look after you. I'll keep you safe.'  

 

She clung to him.  

 

'Will you, Jinks? Will you see that nothing happens to me?'  

 

She sagged against him, and he laid her down gently on the chaise-

longue.  

 
'Oh, I'm a coward,' she murmured, 'a coward... if I knew who it was - 

and why?... Get me my pills - the yellow ones not the brown. I must 

have something to calm me.'  

 

'Don't take too many, for God's sake, MarinaGregg.'  

 

'All right - all right... Sometimes they don't have any effect any 

more...' She looked up in his face.  

 

She smiled, a tender exquisite smile.  

 

'You'll take care of me, Jinks? Swear you'll take care of me -'  

 

'Always,' said JasonRudd . 'To the bitter end.'  

 



Her eyes opened wide.  

 
'You looked so - so odd when you said that.'  

 

'Did I? How did I look?'  

 

'I can't explain. Like - like a clown laughing at something terribly 

sad, that no one else has seen...' 

 

Chapter 21 

 

It was a tired and depressed Inspector Craddock who came to see 

Miss Marple the following day.  

 

'Sit down and be comfortable,' she said. 'I can see you've had a very 
hard time.'  

 

'I don't like to be defeated,' said Inspector Craddock. 'Two murders 

within twenty-four hours. Ah well, I'm poorer at my job than I 

thought I was. Give me a nice cup of tea, Aunt Marple, with some thin 

bread and butter and soothe me with your earliest remembrances 

of St Mary Mead.'  

 

Miss Marple clicked with her tongue in a sympathetic manner.  

 

'Now it's no good talking like that, my dear boy, and I don't think 

bread and butter is after all what you want. Gentlemen, when 

they've had a disappointment, want something stronger than tea.'  



 

As usual, Miss Marple said the word 'gentlemen' in the way of 
someone describing a foreign species.  

 

'I should advise a good stiff whisky and soda,' she said.  

 

'Would you really, Aunt Marple? Well, I won't say no.'  

 

'And I shall get it for you myself,' said Miss Marple, rising to her feet.  

 

'Oh, no, don't do that. Let me. Or what about Miss What's-her-

name?'  

 

'We don't want Miss Knight fussing about in here,' said Miss Marple. 

'She won't be bringing my tea for another twenty minutes so that 
gives us a little peace and quiet. Clever of you to come to the 

window and not through the front door. Now we can have a nice 

quiet little time by ourselves.'  

 

She went to a corner cupboard, opened it and produced a bottle, a 

syphon of soda and a glass.  

 

'You are full of surprises,' said Dermot Craddock. 'I'd no idea that's 

what you kept in your corner cupboard. Are you quite sure you're 

not a secret drinker, Aunt Marple?'  

 

'Now, now,' Miss Marple admonished him. 'I have never been an 

advocate of teetotalism. A little strong drink is always advisable on 

the premises in case there is a shock or an accident. Invaluable at 

such times. Or, of course, if a gentleman should arrive suddenly. 



There!' said Miss Marple, handing him her remedy with an air of 

quiet triumph. 'And you don't need to joke any more. Just sit quietly 
there and relax.'  

 

'Wonderful wives there must have been in your young days,' said 

Dermot Craddock.  

 

'I'm sure, my dear boy, you would find the young lady of the type 

you refer to as a very inadequate helpmeet nowadays. Young ladies 

were not encouraged to be intellectual and very few of them had 

university degrees or any kind of academic distinction.'  

 

'There are things that are preferable to academic distinctions,' said 

Dermot. 'One of them is knowing when a man wants whisky and 

soda and giving it to him.'  
 

Miss Marple smiled at him affectionately.  

 

'Come,' she said, 'tell me all about it. Or as much as you are allowed 

to tell me.'  

 

'I think you probably know as much as I do. And very likely you have 

something up your sleeve. How about your dogsbody, your dear 

Miss Knight? What about her having committed the crime?'  

 

'Now why should Miss Knight have done such a thing?' demanded 

Miss Marple surprised.  

 

'Because she's the most unlikely person,' said Dermot. 'It so often 

seems to hold good when you produce your answer.'  



 

'Not at all,' said Miss Marple with spirit. 'I have said over and over 
again, not only to you, my dear Dermot - if I may call you so - that it 

is always the obvious person who has done the crime. One thinks 

so often of the wife or the husband and so very often it is the wife or 

the husband.'  

 

'Meaning JasonRudd ?' He shook his head. 'That man adores 

MarinaGregg .'  

 

'I was speaking generally,' said Miss Marple, with dignity. 'First we 

had Mrs Badcock apparently murdered. One asked oneself who 

could have done such a thing and the first answer would naturally 

be the husband. So one had to examine that possibility. Then we 

decided that the real object of the crime was MarinaGregg  and 
there again we have to look for the person most intimately 

connected with MarinaGregg , starting as I say with the husband. 

Because there is no doubt about that husbands do, very frequently, 

want to make away with their wives, though sometimes, of course, 

they only wish to make away with their wives and do not actually do 

so. But I agree with you, my dear boy, that JasonRudd  really cares 

with all his heart for MarinaGregg . It might be very clever acting, 

though I can hardly believe that. And one certainly cannot see a 

motive of any kind for his doing away with her. If he wanted to 

marry somebody else there could, I should say, be nothing more 

simple. Divorce, if I may say so, seems second nature to film stars. 

A practical advantage does not seem to arise either. He is not a 

poor man by any means. He has his own career, and is, I 

understand, most successful in it. So we must go farther afield. But 

it certainly is difficult. Yes, very difficult.'  



 

'Yes,' said Craddock, 'it must hold particular difficulties for you 
because of course this film world is entirely new to you. You don't 

know the local scandals and all the rest of it.'  

 

'I know a little more than you may think,' said Miss Marple. 'I have 

studied very closely various numbers of Confidential, Film Life, Film 

Talk and Film Topics.'  

 

Dermot Craddock laughed. He couldn't help it.  

 

'I must say,' he said, 'it tickles me to see you sitting there and telling 

me what your course of literature has been.'  

 

'I found it very interesting,' said Miss Marple. 'They're not 
particularly well written, if I may say so. But it really is 

disappointing in a way that it is all so much the same as it used to 

be in my young days. Modern Society and Tit Bits and all the rest of 

them. A lot of gossip. A lot of scandal. A great preoccupation with 

who is in love with whom, and all the rest of it. Really, you know, 

practically exactly the same sort of thing goes on in St Mary Mead. 

And in the Development too. Human nature, I mean, is just the same 

everywhere. One comes back, I think, to the question of who could 

have been likely to want to kill MarinaGregg , to want to so much 

that having failed once they sent threatening letters and made 

repeated attempts to do so. Someone perhaps a little -' very gently 

she tapped her forehead.  

 

'Yes,' said Craddock, 'that certainly seems indicated. And of course 

it doesn't always show.'  



 

'Oh, I know,' agreed Miss Marple, fervently. 'Old Mrs Pike's second 
boy, Alfred, seemed perfectly rational and normal. Almost painfully 

prosaic, if you know what I mean, but actually, it seems, he had the 

most abnormal psychology, or so I understand. Really positively 

dangerous. He seems quite happy and contented, so Mrs Pike told 

me, now that he is in Fairways Mental Home. They understand him 

there, and the doctors think him a most interesting case. That of 

course pleases him very much. Yes, it all ended quite happily, but 

she had one or two very near escapes.'  

 

Craddock revolved in his mind the possibility of a parallel between 

someone in MarinaGregg 's entourage and Mrs Pike's second son.  

 

'The Italian butler,' continued Miss Marple, 'the one who was killed. 
He went to London, I understand, on the day of his death. Does 

anyone know what he did there - if you are allowed to tell me, that 

is,' she added conscientiously.  

 

'He arrived in London at eleven-thirty in the morning,' said 

Craddock, 'and what he did in London nobody knows until a quarter 

to two he visited his bank and made a deposit of five hundred 

pounds in cash. I may say that there was no confirmation of his 

story that he went to London to visit an ill relative or a relative who 

had got into trouble. None of his relatives there had seen him.'  

 

Miss Marple nodded her head appreciatively.  

 



'Five hundred pounds,' she said. 'Yes, that's quite an interesting 

sum, isn't it. I should imagine it would be the first instalment of a 
good many other sums, wouldn't you?'  

 

'It looks that way,' said Craddock.  

 

'It was probably all the ready money the person he was threatening 

could raise. He may even have pretended to be satisfied with that 

or he may have accepted it as a down payment and the victim may 

have promised to raise further sums in the immediate future. It 

seems to knock out the idea that MarinaGregg 's killer could have 

been someone in humble circumstances who had a private 

vendetta against her. It would also knock out, I should say, the idea 

of someone who'd obtained work as a studio helper or attendant or 

a servant or a gardener. Unless' - Miss Marple pointed out - 'such a 
person may have been the active agent whereas the employing 

agent may not have been in the neighbourhood. Hence the visit to 

London.'  

 

'Exactly. We have in London Ardwyck Fenn, Lola Brewster and 

Margot Bence. All three were present at the party. All three of them 

could have met Giuseppe at an arranged meeting-place somewhere 

in London between the hours of eleven and a quarter to two. 

Ardwyck Fern was out of his office during those hours. Lola 

Brewster had left her suite to go shopping. Margot Bence was not 

in her studio. By the way -'  

 

'Yes?' said Miss Marple, 'have you something to tell me?'  

 



'You asked me,' said Dermot, 'about the children. The children that 

MarinaGregg  adopted before she knew she could have a child of 
her own.'  

 

'Yes I did.'  

 

Craddock told her what he had learned.  

 

'Margot Bence,' said Miss Marple softly. 'I had a feeling, you know, 

that it had something to do with children...'  

 

'I can't believe that after all these years -'  

 

'I know, I know. One never can. But do you really, my dear Dermot, 

know very much about children? Think back to your own childhood. 
Can't you remember some incident, some happening that caused 

you grief, or a passion quite incommensurate with its real 

importance? Some sorrow or passionate resentment that has really 

never been equalled since? There was such a book, you know, 

written by that brilliant writer. Mr Richard Hughes. I forget the 

name of it but it was about some children who had been through a 

hurricane. Oh yes - the hurricane in Jamaica. What made a vivid 

impression on them was their cat rushing madly through the house. 

It was the only thing they remembered. But the whole of the horror 

and excitement and fear that they had experienced was bound up in 

that one incident.'  

 

'It's odd you should say that,' said Craddock thoughtfully.  

 

'Why, has it made you remember something?'  



 

'I was thinking of when my mother died. I was five I think. Five or six. 
I was having dinner in the nursery, jam roll pudding. I was very fond 

of jam roll pudding. One of the servants came in and said to my 

nursery governess, "Isn't it awful? There's been an accident and 

Mrs Craddock has been killed."... Whenever I think of my mother's 

death, d'you know what I see?'  

 

'What?'  

 

'A plate with jam roll pudding on it, and I'm staring at it. Staring at it 

and I can see as well now as then, how the jam oozed out of it at one 

side. I didn't cry or say anything. I remember just sitting there as 

though I'd been frozen stiff, staring at the pudding. And d'you know, 

even now if I see in a shop or a restaurant or in anyone's house a 
portion of jam roll pudding, a whole wave of horror and misery and 

despair comes over me. Sometimes for a moment I don't remember 

why. Does that seem very crazy to you?'  

 

'No,' said Miss Marple, 'it seems entirely natural. It's very 

interesting, that. It's given me a sort of idea...'  

 

The door opened and Miss Knight appeared bearing the tea tray.  

 

'Dear, dear,' she exclaimed, 'and so we've got a visitor, have we? 

How very nice. How do you do, Inspector Craddock. I'll just fetch 

another cup.'  

 

'Don't bother,' Dermot called after her. 'I've had a drink instead.'  

 



Miss Knight popped her head back round the door.  

 
'I wonder - could you just come here a minute, Mr Craddock?'  

 

Dermot joined her in the hall. She went to the dining-room and shut 

the door.  

 

'You will be careful, won't you,' she said.  

 

'Careful? In what way, Miss Knight?'  

 

'Our old dear in there. You know, she's so interested in everything 

but it's not very good for her to get excited over murders and nasty 

things like that. We don't want her to brood and have bad dreams. 

She's very old and frail, and she really must lead a very sheltered 
life. She always has, you know. I'm sure all this talk of murders and 

gangsters and things like that is very, very bad for her.'  

 

Dermot looked at her with faint amusement.  

 

'I don't think,' he said gently, 'that anything that you or I could say 

about murders is likely unduly to excite or shock Miss Marple. I can 

assure you, my dear Miss Knight, that Miss Marple can contemplate 

murder and sudden death and indeed crime of all kinds with the 

utmost equanimity.'  

 

He went back to the drawing-room, and Miss Knight, clucking a 

little in an indignant manner, followed him. She talked briskly during 

tea with an emphasis on political news in the paper and the most 

cheerful subject she could think of. When she finally removed the 



tea tray and shut the door behind her, Miss Marple drew a deep 

breath.  
 

'At last we've got some peace,' she said. 'I hope I shan't murder that 

woman some day. Now listen, Dermot, there are some things I want 

to know.'  

 

'Yes? What are they?'  

 

'I want to go over very carefully what happened on the day of the 

fкte. Mrs Bantry has arrived, and the vicar shortly after her. Then 

come Mr and Mrs Badcock ad on the stairs at that time were the 

mayor and his wife, this man Ardwyck Fenn, Lola Brewster, a 

reporter from the Herald Argus of Much Benham, and this 

photographer girl, Margot Bence. Margot Bence, you said, had her 
camera at an angle on the stairs, and was taking photographs of 

the proceedings. Have you seen any of those photographs?'  

 

'Actually I brought one to show you.'  

 

He took from his pocket an unmounted print. Miss Marple looked at 

it steadfastly. MarinaGregg  with JasonRudd  a little behind her to 

one side, Arthur Badcock, his hand to his face, looking slightly 

embarrassed, was standing back, whilst his wife had MarinaGregg 

's hand in hers and was looking up at her and talking. MarinaGregg 

was not looking at Mrs Badcock. She was staring over her head 

looking, it seemed, full into the camera, or possibly just slightly to 

the left of it.  

 



'Very interesting,' said Miss Marple. 'I've had descriptions, you 

know, of what this look was on her face. A frozen look. Yes, that 
describes it quite well. A look of doom. I'm not really so sure about 

that. It's more a kind of paralysis of feeling rather than 

apprehension of doom. Don't you think so? I wouldn't say it was 

actually fear, would you, although fear of course might take you 

that way. It might paralyse you. But I don't think it was fear. I think 

rather that it was shock. Dermot, my dear boy, I want you to tell me, 

if you've got notes of it, what exactly Heather Badcock said to 

MarinaGregg  on that occasion. I know roughly the gist of it, of 

course, but how near can you get to the actual words. I suppose 

you had accounts of it from different people.'  

 

Dermot nodded.  

 
'Yes. Let me see. Your friend, Mrs Bantry, then JasonRudd  and I 

think Arthur Badcock. As you say they varied a little in wording, but 

the gist of them was the same.'  

 

'I know. It's the variations that I want. I think it might help us.'  

 

'I don't see how,' said Dermot, 'though perhaps you do. Your friend, 

Mrs Bantry, was probably the most definite on the point. As far as I 

remember - wait - I carry a good many of my jottings around with 

me.'  

 

He took out a small note-book from his pocket, looked through it to 

refresh his memory.  

 



'I haven't got the exact words here,' he said, 'but I made a rough 

note. Apparently Mrs Badcock was very cheerful, rather arch, and 
delighted with herself. She said something like "I can't tell you how 

wonderful this is for me. You won't remember but years ago in 

Bermuda - I got up from bed when I had chicken pox and came 

along to see you and you gave me an autograph and it's one of the 

proudest days of my life which I have never forgotten."'  

 

'I see,' said Miss Marple, 'she mentioned the place but not the date, 

did she?'  

 

'Yes.'  

 

'And what did JasonRuddRudd say?'  

 
'JasonRudd ? He said that Mrs Badcock told his wife that she'd got 

up from bed when she had the 'flu and had come to meet MarinaGregg 

and she still had her autograph. It was a shorter account than your 

friend's but the gist of it was the same.'  

 

'Did he mention the time and place?'  

 

'No. I don't think he did. I think he said roughly that it was some ten 

or twelve years ago.'  

 

'I see. And what about Mr Badcock?'  

 

'Mr Badcock said that Heather was extremely excited and anxious 

to meet MarinaGregg , that she was a great fan of MarinaGregg 's 

and that she'd told him that once when she was ill as a girl she 



managed to get up and meet Miss MarinaGregg and get her autograph. He 

didn't go into any close particulars, as it was evidently in the days 
before he was married to his wife. He impressed me as not thinking 

the incident of much importance.'  

 

'I see,' said Miss Marple. 'Yes, I see...'  

 

'And what do you see?' asked Craddock.  

 

'Not quite as much as I'd like to yet,' said Miss Marple, honestly, 'but 

I have a sort of feeling if I only knew why she'd ruined her new dress 

-'  

 

'Who - Mrs Badcock?'  

 
'Yes. It seems to me such a very odd thing - such an inexplicable 

one unless - of course - Dear me, I think I must be very stupid!'  

 

Miss Knight opened the door and entered, switching the light on as 

she did so.  

 

'I think we want a little light in here,' she said brightly.  

 

'Yes,' said Miss Marple, 'you are so right, Miss Knight. That is 

exactly what we did want. A little light. I think, you know, that at last 

we've got it.'  

 

The tкte-а-tкte seemed ended and Craddock rose to his feet.  

 



'There only remains one thing,' he said, 'and that is for you to tell me 

just what particular memory from your own past is agitating your 
mind now.'  

 

'Everyone always teases me about that,' said Miss Marple, 'but I 

must say that I was reminded just for a moment of the Lauristons' 

parlourmaid.'  

 

'The Lauriston's parlourmaid?' Craddock looked completely 

mystified.  

 

'She had, of course, to take messages on the telephone,' said Miss 

Marple, 'and she wasn't very good at it. She used to get the general 

sense right, if you know what I mean, but the way she wrote it down 

used to make quite nonsense of it sometimes. I suppose really, 
because her grammar was so bad. The result was that some very 

unfortunate incidents occurred. I remember one in particular. A Mr 

Burroughs, I think it was, rang up and said he had been to see Mr 

Elvaston about the fence being broken down but he said that the 

fence wasn't his business at all to repair. It was on the other side of 

the property and he said he would like to know if that was really the 

case before proceeding further as it would depend on whether he 

was liable or not and it was important for him to know the proper lie 

of the land before instructing solicitors. A very obscure message, 

as you see. It confused rather than enlightened.'  

 

'If you're talking about parlourmaids,' said Miss Knight with a little 

laugh, 'that must have been a very long time ago. I've never heard 

of a parlourmaid for many years now.'  

 



'It was a good many years ago,' said Miss Marple, 'but nevertheless 

human nature was very much the same then as it is now. Mistakes 
were made for very much the same reasons. Oh dear,' she added, 'I 

am thankful that that girl is safely in Bournemouth.'  

 

'The girl? What girl?' asked Dermot.  

 

'That girl who did dressmaking and went up to see Giuseppe that 

day. What was her name - Gladys something.'  

 

'Gladys Dixon?'  

 

'Yes, that's the name.'  

 

'She's in Bournemouth, do you say? How on earth do you know 
that?'  

 

'I know,' said Miss Marple, 'because I sent her there.'  

 

'What?' Dermot stared at her. 'You? Why?'  

 

'I went out to see her,' said Miss Marple, 'and I gave her some 

money and told her to take a holiday and not to write home.'  

 

'Why on earth did you do that?'  

 

'Because I didn't want her to be killed, of course,' said Miss Marple, 

and blinked at him placidly. 

 



Chapter 22 

 

'Such a sweet letter from Lady Conway,' Miss Knight said two days 

later as she deposited Miss Marple's breakfast tray. 'You remember 

my telling you about her? Just a little, you know -' she tapped her 

forehead - 'wanders sometimes. And her memory's bad. Can't 

recognize her relations always and tells them to go away.'  

 

'That might be shrewdness really,' said Miss Marple, 'rather than a 

loss of memory.'  

 

'Now, now,' said Miss Knight, 'aren't we being naughty to make 

suggestions like that? She's spending the winter at the Belgrave 

Hotel at Llandudno. Such a nice residential hotel. Splendid grounds 

and a very nice glassed-in terrace. She's most anxious for me to 
come and join her there.' She sighed.  

 

Miss Marple sat herself upright in bed.  

 

'But please,' she said, 'if you are wanted - if you are needed there 

and would like to go -'  

 

'No, no, I couldn't hear of it,' cried Miss Knight. 'Oh, no, I never 

meant anything like that. Why, what would Mr Raymond West say? 

He explained to me that being here might turn out to be a 

permanency. I should never dream of not fulfilling my obligations. I 

was only just mentioning the fact in passing, so don't worry, dear,' 

she added, patting Miss Marple on the shoulder. 'We're not going to 



be deserted! no, no, indeed we're not! we're going to be looked 

after and cosseted and made very happy and comfortable always.'  
 

She went out of the room. Miss Marple sat with an air of 

determination, staring at her tray and failing to eat anything. Finally 

she picked up the receiver of the telephone and dialled with vigour.  

 

'Dr Haydock?'  

 

'Yes?'  

 

' Marple here.'  

 

'And what's the matter with you? In need of my professional 

services?'  
 

'No,' said Miss Marple. 'But I want to see you as soon as possible.'  

 

When Dr Haydock came, he found Miss Marple still in bed waiting 

for him.  

 

'You look the picture of health,' he complained.  

 

'That is why I wanted to see you,' said Miss Marple. 'To tell you that I 

am perfectly well.'  

 

'An unusual reason for sending for the doctor.'  

 

'I'm quite strong, I'm quite fit, and it's absurd to have anybody living 

in the house. So long as someone comes every day and does the 



cleaning and all that I don't see any need at all for having someone 

living here permanently.'  
 

'I dare say you don't, but I do,' said Dr Haydock.  

 

'It seems to me you're turning into a regular old fussbudget,' said 

Miss Marple unkindly.  

 

'And don't call me names!' said Dr Haydock. 'You're a very healthy 

woman for your age; you were pulled down a bit by bronchitis 

which isn't good for the elderly. But to stay alone in a house at your 

age is a risk. Supposing you fall down the stairs one evening or fall 

out of bed or slip in the bath. There you'd lie and nobody'd know 

about it.'  

 
'One can imagine anything,' said Miss Marple. 'Miss Knight might 

fall down the stairs and I'd fall over her rushing out to see what had 

happened.'  

 

'It's no good your bullying me,' said Dr Haydock. 'You're an old lady 

and you've got to be looked after in a proper manner. If you don't 

like this woman you've got, change her and get somebody else.'  

 

'That's not always so easy,' said Miss Marple.  

 

'Find some old servant of yours, someone that you like, and who's 

lived with you before. I can see this old hen irritates you. She'd 

irritate me. There must be some old servant somewhere. That 

nephew of yours is one of the best-selling authors of the day. He'd 

make it worth her while if you found the right person.'  



 

'Of course dear Raymond would do anything of that kind. He is most 
generous,' said Miss Marple. 'But it's not so easy to find the right 

person. Young people have their own lives to live, and so many of 

my faithful old servants, I am sorry to say, are dead.'  

 

'Well, you're not dead,' said Dr Haydock, 'and you'll live a good deal 

longer if you take proper care of yourself.'  

 

He rose to his feet.  

 

'Well,' he said. 'No good my stopping here. You look as fit as a 

fiddle. I shan't waste time taking your blood pressure or feeling 

your pulse or asking you questions. You're thriving on all this local 

excitement, even if you can't get about to poke your nose in as 
much as you'd like to do. Goodbye, I've got to go now and do some 

real doctoring. Eight to ten cases of measles, half a dozen 

whooping coughs, and a suspected scarlet fever as well as my 

regulars!'  

 

Dr Haydock went out breezily - But Miss Marple was frowning... 

Something that he had said... what was it? Patients to see... the 

usual village ailments... village ailments? Miss Marple pushed her 

breakfast tray farther away with a purposeful gesture. Then she 

rang up Mrs Bantry.  

 

'Dolly?  here. I want to ask you something. Now pay attention. 

Is it true that you told Inspector Craddock that Heather Badcock 

told MarinaGregg  a long pointless story about how she had 



chicken pox and got up in spite of it to go and meet MarinaGregg and get 

her autograph?'  
 

'That was it more or less.'  

 

'Chicken pox?'  

 

'Well, something like that. Mrs Allcock was talking to me about 

Vodka at the time, so I wasn't really listening closely.'  

 

'You're sure,' Miss Marple took a breath, 'that she didn't say 

whooping cough?'  

 

'Whooping cough?' Mrs Bantry sounded astounded. 'Of course not. 

She wouldn't have had to powder her face and do it up for 
whooping cough.'  

 

'I see - that's what you went by - her special mention of makeup?'  

 

'Well, she laid stress on it - she wasn't the making-up kind. But I 

think you're right, it wasn't chicken pox... Nettlerash, perhaps.'  

 

'You only say that,' said Miss Marple coldly, 'because you once had 

nettlerash yourself and couldn't go to a wedding. You're hopeless, 

Dolly, quite hopeless.'  

 

She put the receiver down with a bang, cutting off Mrs Bantry's 

astonished protest of 'Really, .'  

 



Miss Marple made a ladylike noise of vexation like a cat sneezing to 

indicate profound disgust. Her mind reverted to the problem of her 
own domestic comfort. Faithful Florence? Could faithful Florence, 

that grenadier of a former parlour-maid be persuaded to leave her 

comfortable small house and come back to St Mary Mead to look 

after her erstwhile mistress? Faithful Florence had always been 

very devoted to her. But faithful Florence was very attached to her 

own little house. Miss Marple shook her head vexedly. A gay rat-tat-

tat sounded at the door. On Miss Marple's calling 'Come in,' Cherry 

entered.  

 

'Come for your tray,' she said. 'Has anything happened? You're 

looking rather upset, aren't you?'  

 

'I feel so helpless,' said Miss Marple. 'Old and helpless.'  
 

'Don't worry,' said Cherry, picking up the tray. 'You're very far from 

helpless. You don't know the things I hear about you in this place! 

Why practically everybody in the Development knows about you 

now. All sorts of extraordinary things you've done. They don't think 

of you as the old and helpless kind. It's she puts it into your head.'  

 

'She?'  

 

Cherry gave a vigorous nod of her head backwards towards the 

door behind her.  

 

'Pussy, pussy,' she said. 'Your Miss Knight. Don't you let her get you 

down.'  

 



'She's very kind,' said Miss Marple, 'really very kind,' she added, in 

the tone of one who convinces herself.  
 

'Care killed the cat, they say,' said Cherry. 'You don't want kindness 

rubbed into your skin, so to speak, do you?'  

 

'Oh, well,' said Miss Marple sighing, 'I suppose we all have our 

troubles.'  

 

'I should say we do,' said Cherry. 'I oughtn't to complain but I feel 

sometimes that if I live next door to Mrs Hartwell any longer there's 

going to be a regrettable incident. Sour-faced old cat, always 

gossiping and complaining. Jim's pretty fed up too. He had a first-

class row with her last night. Just because we had The Messiah on 

a bit loud! You can't object to The Messiah, can you? I mean, it's 
religious.'  

 

'Did she object?'  

 

'She created something terrible, said Cherry. 'Banged on the wall 

and shouted and one thing and another.'  

 

'Do you have to have your music turned on so loud?' asked Miss 

Marple.  

 

'Jim likes it that way,' said Cherry. 'He says you don't get the tone 

unless you have full volume.'  

 

'It might,' suggested Miss Marple, 'be a little trying for anyone if they 

weren't musical.'  



 

'It's these houses being semi-detached,' said Cherry. 'Thin as 
anything, the walls. I'm not so keen really on all this new building, 

when you come to think of it. It looks all very prissy and nice but you 

can't express your personality without somebody being down on 

you like a ton of bricks.'  

 

Miss Marple smiled at her.  

 

'You've got a lot of personality to express, Cherry,' she said.  

 

'D'you think so?' Cherry was pleased and she laughed. 'I wonder,' 

she began. Suddenly she looked embarrassed. She put down the 

tray and came back to the bed.  

 
'I wonder if you'd think it cheek if I asked you something? I mean - 

you've only got to say "out of the question" and that's that.'  

 

'Something you want me to do?'  

 

'Not quite. It's those rooms over the kitchen. They're never used 

nowadays, are they?'  

 

'No.'  

 

'Used to be a gardener and wife there once, so I heard. But that's 

old stuff. What I wondered - what Jim and I wondered - is if we could 

have them. Come and live here, I mean.'  

 

Miss Marple stared at her in astonishment.  



 

'But your beautiful new house in the Development?'  
 

'We're both fed up with it. We like gadgets, but you can have 

gadgets anywhere - get them on H.P. and there would be a nice lot 

of room here, especially if Jim could have the room over the 

stables. He'd fix it up like new, and he could have all his 

construction models there, and wouldn't have to clear them away 

all the time. And if we had our stereogram there too, you'd hardly 

hear it.'  

 

'Are you really serious about this, Cherry?'  

 

'Yes, I am. Jim and I, we've talked about it a lot. Jim could fix things 

for you any time - you know, plumbing or a bit of carpentry, and I'd 
look after you every bit as well as your Miss Knight does. I know you 

think I'm a bit slap-dash - but I'd try and take trouble with the beds 

and the washing-up - and I'm getting quite a dab hand at cooking. 

Did Beef Stroganoff last night, it's quite easy, really.'  

 

Miss Marple contemplated her.  

 

Cherry was looking like an eager kitten - vitality and joy of life 

radiated from her. Miss Marple thought once more of faithful 

Florence. Faithful Florence would, of course, keep the house far 

better. (Miss Marple put no faith in Cherry's promise.) But she was 

at least sixty-five - perhaps more. And would she really want to be 

uprooted? She might accept that out of very real devotion for Miss 

Marple. But did Miss Marple really want sacrifices made for her? 



Wasn't she already suffering from Miss Knight's conscientious 

devotion to duty?  
 

Cherry, however inadequate her housework, wanted to come. And 

she had qualities that to Miss Marple at this moment seemed of 

supreme importance.  

 

Warm-heartedness, vitality, and a deep interest in everything that 

was going on.  

 

'I don't want, of course,' said Cherry, 'to go behind Miss Knight's 

back in any way.'  

 

'Never mind about Miss Knight,' said Miss Marple, coming to a 

decision. 'She'll go off to someone called Lady Conway at a hotel in 
Llandudno - and enjoy herself thoroughly. We'll have to settle a lot 

of details, Cherry, and I shall want to talk to your husband - but if 

you really think you'd be happy...'  

 

'It'd suit us down to the ground,' said Cherry. 'And you really can 

rely on me doing things properly. I'll even use the dustpan and 

brush if you like.'  

 

Miss Marple laughed at this supreme offer.  

 

Cherry picked up the breakfast tray again.  

 

'I must get cracking. I got here late this morning - hearing about 

poor Arthur Badcock.'  

 



'Arthur Badcock? What happened to him?'  

 
'Haven't you heard? He's up at the police-station now,' said Cherry. 

'They asked him if he'd come and "assist them with their inquiries" 

and you know what that always means.'  

 

'When did this happen?' demanded Miss Marple.  

 

'This morning,' said Cherry. 'I suppose,' she added, 'that it got out 

about his once having been married to MarinaGregg .' 'What!' Miss 

Marple sat up again. 'Arthur Badcock was once married to MarinaGregg 

?'  

 

'That's the story,' said Cherry. 'Nobody had any idea of it. It was Mr 

Upshaw put it about. He's been to the States once or twice on 
business for his firm and so he knows a lot of gossip from over 

there. It was a long time ago, you know. Really before she'd begun 

her career. They were only married a year or two and then she won 

a film award and of course he wasn't good enough for her then, so 

they had one of these easy American divorces and he just faded 

out, as you might say. He's the fading out kind, Arthur Badcock. He 

wouldn't make a fuss. He changed his name and came back to 

England. It's all ever so long ago. You wouldn't think anything like 

that mattered nowadays, would you? Still, there it is. It's enough for 

the police to go on, I suppose.'  

 

'Oh, no,' said Miss Marple. 'Oh no. This mustn't happen. If I could 

only think what to do - Now, let me see.' She made a gesture to 

Cherry. 'Take the tray away, Cherry, and send Miss Knight up to 

me. I'm going to get up.'  



 

Cherry obeyed. Miss Marple dressed herself with fingers that 
fumbled slightly. It irritated her when she found excitement of any 

kind affecting her. She was just hooking up her dress when Miss 

Knight entered.  

 

'Did you want me? Cherry said -'  

 

Miss Marple broke in incisively.  

 

'Get Inch,' she said.  

 

'I beg your pardon,' said Miss Knight, startled.  

 

'Inch,' said Miss Marple, 'get Inch. Telephone for him to come at 
once.'  

 

'Oh, oh I see. You mean the taxi people. But his name's Roberts, 

isn't it?'  

 

'To me,' said Miss Marple, 'he is Inch and always will be. But anyway 

get him. He's to come here at once.'  

 

'You want to go for a little drive?'  

 

'Just get him, can you?' said Miss Marple, 'and hurry, please.'  

 

Miss Knight looked at her doubtfully and proceeded to do as she 

was told.  

 



'We are feeling all right, dear, aren't we?' she said anxiously.  

 
'We are both feeling very well,' said Miss Marple, 'and I am feeling 

particularly well. Inertia does not suit me, and never has. A 

practical course of action, that is what I have been wanting for a 

long time.'  

 

'Has that Mrs Baker been saying something that has upset you?'  

 

'Nothing has upset me,' said Miss Marple. 'I feel particularly well. I 

am annoyed with myself for being stupid. But really, until I got a hint 

from Dr Haydock this morning - now I wonder if I remember rightly. 

Where is that medical book of mine?' She gestured Miss Knight 

aside and walked firmly down the stairs. She found the book she 

wanted in a shelf in the drawing-room. Taking it out she looked up 
the index, murmured. 'Page 210,' turned to the page in question, 

read for a few moments then nodded her head, satisfied.  

 

'Most remarkable,' she said, 'most curious. I don't suppose anybody 

would ever have thought of it. I didn't myself, until the two things 

came together, so to speak.'  

 

Then she shook her head, and a little line appeared between her 

eyes. If only there was someone...  

 

She went over in her mind the various accounts she had been given 

of that particular scene...  

 



Her eyes widened in thought. There was someone - but would he, 

she wondered, be any good? One never knew with the vicar. He 
was quite unpredictable.  

 

Nevertheless she went to the telephone and dialled.  

 

'Good morning, Vicar, this is Miss Marple.'  

 

'Oh, yes, Miss Marple - anything I can do for you?'  

 

'I wonder if you could help me on a small point. It concerns the day 

of the fкte when poor Mrs Badcock died. I believe you were 

standing quite near Miss MarinaGregg when Mr and Mrs Badcock arrived.'  

 

'Yes - yes - I was just before them, I think. Such a tragic day.'  
 

'Yes, indeed. And I believe that Mrs Badcock was recalling to Miss 

MarinaGregg that they had met before in Bermuda. She had been ill in bed 

and had got up specially.'  

 

'Yes, yes, I do remember.'  

 

'And do you remember if Mrs Badcock mentioned the illness she 

was suffering from?'  

 

'I think now - let me see - yes, it was measles - at least not real 

measles - German measles - a much less serious disease. Some 

people hardly feel ill at all with it. I remember my cousin Caroline...'  

 



Miss Marple cut off reminiscences of Cousin Caroline by saying 

firmly: 'Thank you so much, Vicar,' and replacing the receiver.  
 

There was an awed expression on her face. One of the great 

mysteries of St Mary Mead was what made the vicar remember 

certain things - only outstripped by the greater mystery of what the 

vicar could manage to forget!  

 

'The taxi's here, dear,' said Miss Knight, bustling in. 'It's a very old 

one, and not too clean I should say. I don't really like you driving in a 

thing like that. You might pick up some germ or other.'  

 

'Nonsense,' said Miss Marple. Setting her hat firmly on her head and 

buttoning up her summer coat, she went out to the waiting taxi.  

 
'Good morning, Roberts,' she said.  

 

'Good morning, Miss Marple. You're early this morning. Where do 

you want to go?'  

 

'Gossington Hall, please,' said Miss Marple.  

 

'I'd better come with you, hadn't I, dear,' said Miss Knight. 'It won't 

take a minute just to slip on outdoor shoes.'  

 

'No, thank you,' said Miss Marple, firmly. 'I'm going by myself. Drive 

on, Inch. I mean Roberts.'  

 

Mr Roberts drove on, merely remarking:  

 



'Ah, Gossington Hall. Great changes there and everywhere 

nowadays. All that development. Never thought anything like that'd 
come to St Mary Mead.'  

 

Upon arrival at Gossington Hall Miss Marple rang the bell and asked 

to see JasonRudd .  

 

Giuseppe's successor, a rather shaky-looking elderly man, 

conveyed doubt.  

 

'JasonRuddRudd,' he said, 'does not see anybody without an appointment, 

madam. And today especially -'  

 

'I have no appointment,' said Miss Marple, 'but I will wait,' she 

added.  
 

She stepped briskly past him into the hall and sat down on a hall 

chair.  

 

'I'm afraid it will be quite impossible this morning, madam.'  

 

'In that case,' said Miss Marple, 'I shall wait until this afternoon.'  

 

Baffled, the new butler retired. Presently a young man came to Miss 

Marple. He had a pleasant manner and a cheerful, slightly American 

voice.  

 

'I've seen you before,' said Miss Marple. 'In the Development. You 

asked me the way to Blenheim Close.'  

 



Harley Preston smiled good-naturedly. 'I guess you did your best, 

but you misdirected me badly.'  
 

'Dear me, did I?' said Miss Marple. 'So many Closes, aren't there. 

Can I see JasonRuddRudd?'  

 

'Why, now, that's too bad,' said Harley Preston. 'JasonRuddRudd's a busy 

man and he's - er - fully occupied this morning and really can't be 

disturbed.'  

 

'I'm sure he's very busy,' said Miss Marple. 'I came here quite 

prepared to wait.'  

 

'Why, I'd suggest now,' said Hailey Preston, 'that you should tell me 

what it is you want. I deal with all these things for JasonRuddRudd, you see. 
Everyone has to see me first.'  

 

'I'm afraid,' said Miss Marple, 'that I want to see JasonRuddRudd himself. 

And,' she added, 'I shall wait here until I do.'  

 

She settled herself more firmly in the large oak chair.  

 

Hailey Preston hesitated, started to speak, finally turned away and 

went upstairs.  

 

He returned with a large man in tweeds.  

 

'This is Dr Gilchrist. Miss - er -'  

 

'Miss Marple.'  



 

'So you're Miss Marple,' said Dr Gilchrist. He looked at her with a 
good deal of interest.  

 

Hailey Preston slipped away with celerity.  

 

'I've heard about you,' said Dr Gilchrist. 'From Dr Haydock.'  

 

'Dr Haydock is a very old friend of mine.'  

 

'He certainly is. Now you want to see JasonRuddRudd? Why?'  

 

'It is necessary that I should,' said Miss Marple.  

 

Dr Gilchrist's eyes appraised her.  
 

'And you're camping here until you do?' he asked.  

 

'Exactly.'  

 

'You would, too,' said Dr Gilchrist. 'In that case I will give you a 

perfectly good reason why you cannot see JasonRuddRudd. His wife died 

last night in her sleep.'  

 

'Dead? exclaimed Miss Marples. 'How?'  

 

'An overdose of sleeping stuff. We don't want the news to leak out 

to the Press for a few hours. So I'll ask you to keep this knowledge 

to yourself for the moment.'  

 



'Of course. Was it an accident?'  

 
'That is definitely my view,' said Gilchrist.  

 

'But it could be suicide.'  

 

'It could - but most unlikely.'  

 

'Or someone could have given it to her?'  

 

Gilchrist shrugged his shoulders.  

 

'A most remote contingency. And a thing,' he added firmly, 'that 

would be quite impossible to prove.'  

 
'I see,' said Miss Marple. She took a deep breath. 'I'm sorry, but it's 

more necessary than ever that I should see JasonRuddRudd.'  

 

Gilchrist looked at her.  

 

'Wait here,' he said. 

 

Chapter 23 

 

JasonRudd  looked up as Gilchrist entered.  

 

'There's an old dame downstairs,' said the doctor; 'looks about a 

hundred. Wants to see you. Won't take no and says she'll wait. 



She'll wait till this afternoon, I gather, or she'll wait till this evening 

and she's quite capable, I should say, of spending the night here. 
She's got something she badly wants to say to you. I'd see her if I 

were you.'  

 

JasonRudd  looked up from his desk. His face was white and 

strained.  

 

'Is she mad?'  

 

'No. Not in the least.'  

 

'I don't see why I - Oh, all right - send her up. What does it matter?'  

 

Gilchrist nodded, went out of the room and called to Hailey Preston.  
 

'JasonRuddRudd can spare you a few minutes now, Miss Marple,' said 

Hailey Preston, appearing again by her side.  

 

'Thank you. That's very kind of him,' said Miss Marple as she rose to 

her feet. 'Have you been with JasonRuddRudd long?' she asked.  

 

'Why, I've worked with JasonRuddRudd for the last two and a half years. My 

job is public relations generally.'  

 

'I see.' Miss Marple looked at him thoughtfully. 'You remind me very 

much,' she said, 'of someone I knew called Gerald French.'  

 

'Indeed? What did Gerald French do?'  

 



'Not very much,' said Miss Marple, 'but he was a very good talker.' 

She sighed. 'He had had an unfortunate past.'  
 

'You don't say,' said Halley Preston, slightly ill at ease. 'What kind of 

a past?'  

 

'I won't repeat it,' said Miss Marple. 'He didn't like it talked about.'  

 

JasonRudd  rose from his desk and looked with some surprise at 

the slender elderly lady who was advancing towards him.  

 

'You wanted to see me?' he said. 'What can I do for you?'  

 

'I am very sorry about your wife's death,' said Miss Marple. 'I can 

see it has been a great grief to you and I want you to believe that I 
should not intrude upon you now or offer you sympathy unless it 

was absolutely necessary. But there are things that need badly to 

be cleared up unless an innocent man is going to suffer.'  

 

'An innocent man? I don't understand you.'  

 

'Arthur Badcock,' said Miss Marple. 'He is with the police now, 

being questioned.'  

 

'Questioned in connection with my wife's death? But that's absurd, 

absolutely absurd. He's never been near the place. He didn't even 

know her.'  

 

'I think he knew her,' said Miss Marple. 'He was married to her 

once.'  



 

'Arthur Badcock? But - he was - he was Heather Badcock's 
husband. Aren't you perhaps,' - he spoke kindly and apologetically - 

'Making a little mistake?'  

 

'He was married to both of them,' said Miss Marple. 'He was married 

to your wife when she was very young, before she went into 

pictures.'  

 

JasonRudd  shook his head.  

 

'My wife was first married to a man called Alfred Beadle. He was in 

real estate. They were not suited and they parted almost 

immediately.'  

 
'Then Alfred Beadle changed his name to Badcock,' said Miss 

Marple. 'He's in a real estate firm here. It's odd how some people 

never seem to like to change their job and want to go on doing the 

same thing. I expect really that's why MarinaGregg  felt that he was 

no use to her. He couldn't have kept up with her.'  

 

'What you've told me is most surprising.'  

 

'I can assure you that I am not romancing or imagining things. What 

I am telling you is sober fact. These things get round very quickly in 

a village, you know, though they take a little longer,' she added, 'in 

reaching the Hall.'  

 



'Well,' JasonRudd  stalled, uncertain what to say, then he accepted 

the position, 'and what do you want me to do for you, Miss Marple?' 
he asked.  

 

'I want, if I may, to stand on the stairs at the spot where you and 

your wife received guests on the day of the fкte.'  

 

He shot a quick doubtful glance at her. Was this, after all, just 

another sensation-seeker? But Miss Marple's face was grave and 

composed.  

 

'Why certainly,' he said, 'if you want to do so. Come with me.'  

 

He led her to the staircase head and paused in the hollowed-out 

bay at the top of it.  
 

'You've made a good many changes in the house since the Bantrys 

were here,' said Miss Marple. 'I like this. Now, let me see. The tables 

would be about here, I suppose, and you and your wife would be 

standing '  

 

'My wife stood here.' JasonRudd showed her the place. 'People came up 

the stairs, she shook hands with them and passed them on to me.'  

 

'She stood here,' said Miss Marple.  

 

She moved over and took her place where MarinaGregg  had stood. 

She remained there quite quietly without moving. JasonRudd  

watched her. He was perplexed but interested. She raised her right 

hand slightly as though shaking, looked down the stairs as though 



to see people coming up it. Then she looked straight ahead of her. 

On the wall half-way up the stairs was a large picture, a copy of an 
Italian Old Master. On either side of it were narrow windows, one 

giving out on the garden and the other giving on to the end of the 

stables and the weathercock. But Miss Marple looked at neither of 

these. Her eyes were fixed on the picture itself.  

 

'Of course you always hear a thing right the first time,' she said. 

'Mrs Bantry told me that your wife stared at the picture and her face 

"froze," as she put it.' She looked at the rich red and blue robes of 

the Madonna, a Madonna with her head slightly back, laughing up at 

the Holy Child that she was holding up in her arms. 'Giacomo 

Bellini's "Laughing Madonna",' she said. 'A religious picture, but 

also a painting of a happy mother with her child. Isn't that so JasonRuddRudd?'  
 

'I would say so, yes.'  

 

'I understand now,' said Miss Marple. 'I understand quite well. The 

whole thing is really very simple, isn't it?' She looked at JasonRudd 

.  

 

'Simple?'  

 

'I think you know how simple it is,' said Miss Marple. There was a 

peal on the bell below.  

 

'I don't think,' said JasonRudd , 'I quite understand.' He looked 

down the stairway. There was a sound of voices.  

 



'I know that voice,' said Miss Marple, 'it's Inspector Craddock's 

voice, isn't it?'  
 

'Yes, it seems to be Inspector Craddock.'  

 

'He wants to see you, too. Would you mind very much if he joined 

us?'  

 

'Not at all as far as I am concerned. Whether he will agree -'  

 

'I think he will agree,' said Miss Marple. 'There's really not much 

time now to be lost is there? We've got to the moment when we've 

got to understand just how everything happened.'  

 

'I thought you said it was simple,' said JasonRudd .  
 

'It was so simple,' said Miss Marple, 'that one just couldn't see it.'  

 

The decayed butler arrived at this moment up the stairs.  

 

'Inspector Craddock is here, sir,' he said.  

 

'Ask him to join us here, please,' said JasonRudd .  

 

The butler disappeared again and a moment or two later Dermot 

Craddock came up the stairs.  

 

'You!' he said to Miss Marple, 'how did you get here?'  

 



'I came in Inch,' said Miss Marple, producing the usual confused 

effect that that remark always caused.  
 

From slightly behind her JasonRudd  rapped his forehead 

interrogatively. Dermot Craddock shook his head.  

 

'I was saying to JasonRuddRudd,' said Miss Marple, '- has the butler gone 

away -'  

 

Dermot Craddock cast a look down the stairs.  

 

'Oh, yes,' he said, 'he's not listening. Sergeant Tiddler will see to 

that.'  

 

'Then that is all right,' said Miss Marple. 'We could of course have 
gone into a room to talk, but I prefer it like this. Here we are on the 

spot where the thing happened, which makes it so much easier to 

understand.'  

 

'You are talking,' said JasonRudd , 'of the day of the fкte here, the 

day when Heather Badcock was poisoned.'  

 

'Yes,' said Miss Marple, 'and I'm saying that it is all very simple if 

one only looks at it in the proper way. It all began, you see, with 

Heather Badcock being the kind of person she was. It was 

inevitable, really, that something of that kind should happen some 

day to Heather.'  

 

'I don't understand what you mean,' said JasonRudd . 'I don't 

understand at all.'  



 

'No, it has to be explained a little. You see, when my friend, Mrs 
Bantry who was here, described the scene to me, she quoted a 

poem that was a great favourite in my youth, a poem of dear Lord 

Tennyson's. "The Lady of Shalott".' She raised her voice a little. 

 

"The mirror crack'd from ride to side:  

 

'The Curse is come upon me,' cried  

 

The Lady of Shalott." 

 

That's what Mrs Bantry saw, or thought she saw, though actually 

she misquoted and said doom instead of curse perhaps a better 

word in the circumstances. She saw your wife speaking to Heather 
Badcock and heard Heather Badcock speaking to your wife and 

she saw this look of doom on your wife's face.'  

 

'Haven't we been over that a great many times?' said JasonRudd .  

 

'Yes, but we shall have to go over it once more,' said Miss Marple. 

'There was that expression on your wife's face and she was looking 

not at Heather Badcock but at that picture. At a picture of a 

laughing, happy mother holding up a happy child. The mistake was 

that though there was doom foreshadowed in MarinaGregg 's face, 

it was not on her the doom would come. The doom was to come 

upon Heather. Heather was doomed from the first moment that she 

began talking and boasting of an incident in the past.'  



 

'Could you make yourself a little clearer?' said Dermot Craddock.  
 

Miss Marple turned to him.  

 

'Of course I will. This is something that you know nothing about. You 

couldn't know about it, because nobody has told you what it was 

Heather Badcock actually said.'  

 

'But they have,' protested Dermot. 'They've told me over and over 

again. Several people have told me.'  

 

'Yes,' said Miss Marple, 'but you don't know because, you see, 

Heather Badcock didn't tell it to you.'  

 
'She hardly could tell it to me seeing she was dead when I arrived 

here,' said Dermot.  

 

'Quite so,' said Miss Marple. 'All you know is that she was ill but she 

got up from bed and came along to a celebration of some kind 

where she met MarinaGregg  and spoke to her and asked for an 

autograph and was given one.'  

 

'I know,' said Craddock with slight impatience. 'I've heard all that.'  

 

'But you didn't hear the one operative phrase, because no one 

thought it was important,' said Miss Marple. 'Heather Badcock was 

ill in bed - with German measles.'  

 

'German measles? What on earth has that got to do with it?'  



 

'It's a very slight illness, really,' said Miss Marple. 'It hardly makes 
you feel ill at all. You have a rash which is easy to cover up with 

powder, and you have a little fever, but not very much. You feel 

quite well enough to go out and see people if you want to. And of 

course in repeating all this the fact that it was German measles 

didn't strike people particularly. Mrs Bantry, for instance, just said 

that Heather had been ill in bed and mentioned chicken pox and 

nettlerash. JasonRuddRudd here said that it was 'flu, but of course he did 

that on purpose. But I think myself that what Heather Badcock said 

to MarinaGregg  was that she had had German measles and got up 

from bed and went off to meet MarinaGregg. And that's really the answer 

to the whole thing, because, you see, German measles is extremely 

infectious. People catch it very easily. And there's one thing about it 

which you've got to remember. If a woman contracts it in the first 
four months of-' Miss Marple spoke the next word with a slight 

Victorian modesty '- of - er - pregnancy, it may have a terribly 

serious effect. It may cause an unborn child to be born blind or to 

be born mentally affected.'  

 

She turned to JasonRudd .  

 

'I think I am correct in saying, JasonRuddRudd, that your wife had a child 

who was born mentally afflicted and that she has never really 

recovered from the shock. She had always wanted a child and 

when at last the child came, this was the tragedy that happened. A 

tragedy she has never forgotten, that she has not allowed herself to 

forget and which ate into her as a kind of deep sore, an obsession.'  

 



'It's quite true,' said JasonRudd . 'MarinaGregg developed German 

measles early on in her pregnancy and was told by the doctor that 
the mental affliction of her child was due to that cause. It was not a 

case of inherited insanity or anything of that kind. He was trying to 

be helpful but I don't think it helped her much. She never knew how, 

or when or from whom she had contracted the disease.'  

 

'Quite so,' said Miss Marple, 'she never knew until one afternoon 

here when a perfectly strange woman came up those stairs and 

told her the fact - told her, what was more - with a great deal of 

pleasure! With an air of being proud of what she'd done! She 

thought she'd been resourceful and brave and shown a lot of spirit 

in getting up from her bed, covering her face with make-up, and 

going along to meet the actress on whom she had such a crush and 

obtaining her autograph. It's a thing she has boasted of all through 
her life. Heather Badcock meant no harm. She never did mean 

harm but there is no doubt that people like Heather Badcock (and 

like my old friend Alison Wilde), are capable of doing a lot of harm 

because they lack not kindness, they have kindness - but any real 

consideration for the way their actions may affect other people. 

She thought always of what an action meant to her, never sparing a 

thought to what it might mean to somebody else.'  

 

Miss Marple nodded her head gently.  

 

'So she died, you see, for a simple reason out of her own past. You 

must imagine what that moment meant to MarinaGregg . I think JasonRuddRudd understands it very well. I think she had nursed all those 

years a kind of hatred for the unknown person who had been the 

cause of her tragedy. And here suddenly she meets that person 



face to face. And a person who is gay, jolly and pleased with 

herself. It was too much for her. If she had had time to think, to calm 
down, to be persuaded to relax - but she gave herself no time. Here 

was this woman who had destroyed her happiness and destroyed 

the sanity and health of her child. She wanted to punish her. She 

wanted to kill her. And unfortunately the means were at hand. She 

carried with her that well-known specific, Calmo. A somewhat 

dangerous drug because you had to be careful of the exact dosage. 

It was very easy to do. She put the stuff into her own glass. If by any 

chance anyone noticed what she was doing they were probably so 

used to her pepping herself up or soothing herself down in any 

handy liquid that they'd hardly notice it. It's possible that one 

person did see her, but I rather doubt it. I think that Miss Zielinsky 

did no more than guess. MarinaGregg  put her glass down on the 

table and presently she managed to jog Heather Badcock's arm so 
that Heather Badcock spilt her own drink all down her new dress. 

And that's where the element of puzzle has come into the matter, 

owing to the fact that people cannot remember to use their 

pronouns properly.  

 

'It reminds me so much of that parlourmaid I was telling you about,' 

she added to Dermot. 'I only had the account, you see, of what 

Gladys Dixon said to Cherry which simply was that she was worried 

about the ruin of Heather Badcock's dress with the cocktail spilt 

down it. What seemed so funny, she said, was that she did it on 

purpose. But the "she" that Gladys referred to was not Heather 

Badcock, it was MarinaGregg . As Gladys said: She did it on 

purpose! She jogged Heather's arm. Not by accident but because 

she meant to do so. We do know that she must have been standing 

very close to Heather because we have heard that she mopped up 



both Heather's dress and her own before pressing her cocktail on 

Heather. It was really,' said Miss Marple meditatively, 'a very 
perfect murder; because, you see, it was committed on the spur of 

the moment without pausing to think or reflect. She wanted Heather 

Badcock dead and a few minutes later Heather Badcock was dead. 

She didn't realize, perhaps, the seriousness of what she'd done and 

certainly not the danger of it until afterwards. But she realized it 

then. She was afraid, horribly afraid. Afraid that someone had seen 

her dope her own glass, that someone had seen her deliberately jog 

Heather's elbow, afraid that someone would accuse her of having 

poisoned Heather. She could see only one way out. To insist that 

the murder had been aimed at her, that she was the prospective 

victim. She tried that idea first on her doctor. She refused to let him 

tell her husband because I think she knew that her husband would 

not be deceived. She did fantastic things. She wrote notes to 
herself and arranged to find them in extraordinary places and at 

extraordinary moments. She doctored her own coffee at the studios 

one day. She did things that could really have been seen through 

fairly easily if one had happened to be thinking that way. They were 

seen through by one person.'  

 

She looked at JasonRudd .  

 

'This is only a theory of yours,' said JasonRudd .  

 

'You can put it that way, if you like,' said Miss Marple, 'but you know 

quite well, don't you, JasonRuddRudd, that I'm speaking the truth. You 

know, because you knew from the first. You knew because you 

heard that mention of German measles. You knew and you were 

frantic to protect her. But you didn't realize how much you would 



have to protect her from. You didn't realize that it was not only a 

question of hushing up one death, the death of a woman whom you 
might say quite fairly had brought her death on herself. But there 

were other deaths - the death of Giuseppe, a blackmailer, it is true, 

but a human being. And the death of Ella Zielinsky of whom I expect 

you were fond. You were frantic to protect MarinaGregg and also to 

prevent her from doing more harm. All you wanted was to get her 

safely away somewhere. You tried to watch her all the time, to make 

sure that nothing more should happen.'  

 

She paused, and then coming nearer to JasonRudd , she laid a 

gentle hand on his arm.  

 

'I am very sorry for you,' she said, 'very sorry. I do realize the agony 

you've been through. You cared for her so much, didn't you?'  
 

JasonRudd  turned slightly away.  

 

'That,' he said, 'is, I believe, common knowledge.'  

 

'She was such a beautiful creature,' said Miss Marple gently. 'She 

had such a wonderful gift. She had a great power of love and hate 

but no stability. That's what's so sad for anyone, to be born with no 

stability. She couldn't let the past go and she could never see the 

future as it really was, only as she imagined it to be. She was a 

great actress and a beautiful and very unhappy woman. What a 

wonderful Mary, Queen of Scots, she was! I shall never forget her.'  

 

Sergeant Tiddler appeared suddenly on the stairs.  

 



'Sir,' he said, 'can I speak to you a moment?'  

 
Craddock turned.  

 

'I'll be back,' he said to JasonRudd , then he went towards the 

stairs.  

 

'Remember,' Miss Marple called after him, 'poor Arthur Badcock 

had nothing to do with this. He came to the fкte because he wanted 

to have a glimpse of the girl he had married long ago. I should say 

she didn't even recognize him. Did she?' she asked JasonRudd .  

 

JasonRudd  shook his head.  

 

'I don't think so. She certainly never said anything to me. I don't 
think,' he added thoughtfully, 'she would recognize him.'  

 

'Probably not,' said Miss Marple. 'Anyway,' she added, 'he's quite 

innocent of wanting to kill her or anything of that kind. Remember 

that,' she added to Dermot Craddock as he went down the stairs.  

 

'He's not been in any real danger, I can assure you,' said Craddock, 

'but of course when we found out that he had actually been Miss 

MarinaGregg 's first husband we naturally had to question him on 

the point. Don't worry about him, Aunt Marple,' he added in a low 

murmur, then he hurried down the stairs.  

 

Miss Marple turned to JasonRudd . He was standing there like a 

man in a daze, his eyes far away.  

 



'Would you allow me to see her?' said Miss Marple.  

 
He considered her for a moment or two, then he nodded.  

 

'Yes, you can see her. You seem to - understand her very well.'  

 

He turned and Miss Marple followed him. He preceded her into the 

big bedroom and drew the curtains slightly aside.  

 

MarinaGregg  lay in the great white shell of the bed - her eyes 

closed, her hands folded.  

 

So, Miss Marple thought, might the Lady of Shalott have lain in the 

boat that carried her down to Camelot. And there, standing musing, 

was a man with a rugged, ugly face, who might pass as a Lancelot 
of a later day.  

 

Miss Marple said gently, 'It's very fortunate for her that she - took an 

overdose. Death was really the only way of escape left to her. Yes - 

very fortunate she took that overdose - or - was given it?'  

 

His eyes met hers, but he did not speak.  

 

He said brokenly, 'She was - so lovely - and she had suffered so 

much.'  

 

Miss Marple looked back again at the still figure.  

 

She quoted softly the last lines of the poem: 



'He said: "She has a lovely face;  

God in His mercy lend her grace,  
The Lady of Shalott."'





